EXCURSUS

II.

POPULAR NAMES FOR EUCLIDEAN

PROPOSITIONS.

Although some of these time-honoured names are familiar to most educated
people, it seems to be impossible to trace them to their original sources, or to
say who applied them for the first time respectively. It may be that they were
handed down by oral tradition for long periods in each case before they found
their way into written documents.
We begin with
I. 5.
i. This proposition is in this country universally known as the Pons
Asinorum, " A s s e s ' Bridge." Even in this case opinion is not unanimous as
to the exact implication of the term. Perhaps the more general view is that
taken in the Stanford Dictionary of Anglicised Words and Phrases (by
C. A . M . Fennell) where the description i s : " Name of the fifth proposition
of the first Book of Euclid, suggested by the figure and the difficulties which
poor geometricians find in mastering it." T h i s is certainly the equivalent of
what I gathered, in my early days at school, from a former Fellow of St John's,
the Reverend Anthony Bower, who was a high Wrangler in 1846 and a friend
of Todhunter's. T h e " ass " on this interpretation is a synonym for " fool."
But there is another view (as I have learnt lately) which is more complimentary
to the ass. It is that, the figure of the proposition being like that of a trestlebridge, with a ramp at each end which is the more practicable the flatter the
figure is drawn, the bridge is such that, while a horse could not surmount the
ramp, an ass c o u l d ; in other words, the term is meant to refer to the surefootedness of the ass rather than to any want of intelligence on his part. (I may
perhaps mention that Sir George Greenhill is a strong supporter of this view.)
A n epigram of 1780 is the earliest reference to the term in Murray's
English Dictionary:
" I f this be rightly called the bridge of asses,
He's not the fool that sticks but he that passes."

T h e writer's own view is not too clear. H e seems to imply that, while the
inventor of the name meant that only the fool find? the bridge difficult to
pass, the more proper view would be that, since the ass can get over, and
" ass " is synonymous with " fool," therefore it must be the fool who can get
over; in other words, he seems to object to the phrase as being a contradic­
tion in terms.
But we have also to take account of the fact that the French apply the
term to 1. 47. Now in Euclid's figure for I. 47 there is no suggestion of a
bridge, and the reference can only be to the nature of the theorem, its diffi­
culty or otherwise. It is curious that the French dictionaries give two different
explanations of Pont aux ones. Littre makes it " ce que personne ne doit ni
ne peut ignorer; ce qui est si facile que tout le monde doit y reussir." Now
no intelligent person could have applied the name to Eucl. 1. 47 for this
reason, namely that it was so easy that even a fool could not help knowing it.
Larousse is better informed; there we find "Pont aux anes, certaine difficulty,
certaine question qui n'arrete que les ignorants, et qui sert de criterium

