pour juger l'intelligence de quelqu'un, et particulierement d'un ecolier. C'est
ainsi que, dans les classes de mathematiques, on ne manque jamais de dire
que le carre de l'hypotenuse est le pont aux dnes de la geometrie. L a plupart
des dictionnaires entendent par ce mot une chose si -simple, si facile, que
personne ne doit l'ignorer: c'est une erreur evidente" Larousse is clearly right.
But it will be observed that, so far as it goes, Larousse's interpretation rather
supports the first of the two alternative explanations of the meaning of " A s s e s '
B r i d g e " as applied to i. 5, namely that it is difficult for the fool (= "ass") to
master.
In the Stanford Dictionary it is added that " in logic the term was in the
16 & applied to the conversion of propositions by the aid of a difficult
diagram for finding middle terms " ; and if the mathematicians borrowed the
term from logic, this again would be rather in favour of the first explanation
of its use for 1. 5.
If it is permitted desipere in loco, I would add for the benefit of future
generations (in the hope that they will still be able to appreciate the joke or,
in the alternative, will be tempted to discuss learnedly what could possibly
have been meant) a very topical allusion in a recent Punch ( 1 4 Oct. 1 9 2 5 ) :
" W h e n they film Euclid, as is suggested, we shall no doubt see a very
thrilling rescue over the burning Pons Asinorum."—And yet it is safe to
prophesy that the " Asses' Bridge " will outlive the " film " !
-

2. Elefuga.
T h i s name for Eucl. 1. 5 is mentioned by Roger Bacon (about 1250), who
also gives an explanation of it (Opus Tertium, c. vi). H e observes that in his
day people in general, finding no Utility in any science such as geometry, for
example, recoiled from the idea of studying it unless they were boys forced to
it by the rod, so that they would hardly learn so much as three or four pro­
positions. H e n c e it is, he says, that the fifth proposition is called " Elefuga,
id est, fuga miserorum; elegia enim Graece dicitur, Latine miseria; et elegi
sunt miseri." T h a t is, according to Roger Bacon, Elefuga is " flight of the
miserable." T h i s explanation no doubt accounts for the verses about Dulcarnon in Chaucer's Troilus and Criseyde, III, 11. 933-5 :
" D u l c a m o n called is

1

fieminge of w r e c c h e s ' ;

I t seemeth hard, for wrecches wol

not

lere

F o r verray slouthe or othere wilful t e c c h e s " ;

since "fieminge of wrecches," "banishment of the miserable," is a translation
of " fuga miserorum." Only D u l c a m o n is there wrongly taken to be the same
proposition as Elefuga, i.e. i. 5, whereas, as we shall see, Dulcamon was really
the name for the Pythagorean theorem 1. 47.
Etymologically, R o g e r Bacon's explanation leaves something to be de­
sired. T h e word would really seem to be an attempt to compound the two
Greek words L\TO%, pity (or the object of pity), and <PVYRJ, flight (cf. note
ad loc. in Skeat's edition of Chaucer). Notwithstanding the confusion of
tongues, the object seems to be a play upon the two words Elementa and
IKTOI, which both begin with the same three letters, and the implication is that
"escape from the Elements " (which normally came when Prop. 5 was reached)
was equivalent to " e s c a p e from misery" or "trouble." A better form for the
word would perhaps be Eleufuga; and this form actually occurs in Alanus'
Anticlaudianus, Hi, c. 6 (cited by D u Cange, Glossarium, s.v.). T h e word
also occurs, according to Skeat's note, in Richard of Bury's Phtiobiblon,
c. xiii, where it was somewhat oddly translated by J. B . Inglis in 1832 " H o w
many scholars has the Helleflight of Euclid repelled !"

