I. 47T h e Pythagorean proposition about the square on the hypotenuse has
taken even a deeper hold of the minds of men, and has been known by
a number of names.
1. The Theorem of the Bride (Ouipypa. TT/S vipj^rp).
This name is found in a MS. of Georgius Pachymeres ( 1 2 4 2 - 1 3 1 0 ) in the
Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris; there is a note to this effect by Tannery
(La Giomitrie grecque, p. 105), but, as he says nothing more, it is probable
that the passage gives the mere name without any explanation of it. W e
have, however, much earlier evidence of the supposed connexion of the pro­
position with marriage.
Plutarch (born about 46 A . D . ) says (De /side et
Osiride 56, p. 373 F) " W e may imagine the Egyptians (thinking of) the most
beautiful of triangles (and) likening the nature of the A l l to this triangle most
particularly, for it is this same triangle which Plato is thought to have
employed in the Republic, when he put together the Nuptial Figure (yauijkiov
Stdypappa)"—Bidypappa, though literally meaning "diagram " or "figure," was
commonly used in the sense of " proposition " — " and in that triangle the per­
pendicular side is 3, the base 4, and the hypotenuse, the square on which is
equal to the sum of the squares on the sides containing (the right angle), 5.
W e must, then, liken the perpendicular to the male, the base to the female and
the hypotenuse to the offspring of both....For 3 is the first odd number and
is perfect, 4 is the square on an even side, 2, while the 5 partly resembles the
father and partly the mother, being the sum of 3 and 2."
Plato used the three numbers 3, 4, 5 of the Pythagorean triangle in the
formation of his famous Geometrical N u m b e r ; but Plato himself does not call
the triangle the Nuptial Triangle nor the number the Nuptial Number. It is
later writers, Plutarch, Nicomachus and Iamblichus, who connect the passage
about the Geometrical Number with marriage ; Nicomachus (Introd. Ar., 11,
24, n ) merely alludes to " t h e passage in the Republic connected with the
so-called Marriage," while Iamblichus (In Nicom., p. 82, 20 Pistelli) only
speaks of " the Nuptial Number in the Republic."
It would appear, then, that the name " Nuptial Figure " or " Theorem of
the Bride " was originally used of one particular right-angled triangle, namely
(3> 4> 5)'
Arabian writer Beha-ad-dln ( 1 5 4 7 - 1 6 2 2 ) seems to have
applied the term " Figure of the B r i d e " to the same triangle; the Arabs
therefore seemingly followed the Greeks. T h e idea underlying the use of the
term, first for the triangle (3, 4, 5), and then for the general theorem of I. 47,
seems to be roughly that of the two parties to a marriage becoming one, just
as the two squares on the sides containing the right angle become the one
square on the hypotenuse in the said theorem.
A

a t e

2. The "Bride's Chair."
T h e origin of this name is more obscure. It must presumably have been
suggested by a supposed resemblance between the figure of the proposition
and such a chair.
D . E . Smith (History of Mathematics, 11, pp. 289-90)
remarks that the " Bride's C h a i r " may be so-called " because the Euclid
figure is not unlike the chair which a slave carries on his back and in which
the Eastern bride is sometimes transported to the ceremony," and he cites a
note from Edouard Lucas'Rkreations Mathimatiques, 11, p. 130 : " L a demon­
stration que nous venons d e donner du thebreme de Pythagore sur le carre
de l'hypotenuse ne differe pas essentialement de la demonstration hindoue,
connue sous le nom de la Chaise de la petite mariie, que Ton rencontre dans

