louvrage de Bhascara (Bija-Ganita, § 1 4 6 ) . " T h e figure of Bhaskara is not
that of Euclid but that shown at the top of p 355 a b o v e ; I have however
not been able to find the name " Bride's Chair " in Colebrooke's translation
of the work of Bhaskara.
Notwithstanding the apparent frivolity of the setting, I venture to suggest
that light may be thrown on the question by a very modern version of the
" Bride's C h a i r " which appeared during or since the War in La Vie Parisienne.
T h e illustration represents Euclid's figure for 1. 47 and, drawn over it, as on
a frame, a poilu in full fighting kit carrying on his back his bride and his house­
hold belongings. Roughly speaking, the soldier is standing (or rather walking)
in the middle of the large square, his head and shoulders are bending to the
right within the contour of one of the small squares, while the lady, with
mirror and powder-puff in action, is sitting with her back to him in the right
angle between the two smaller squares (HAG in the figure on p. 349 a b o v e ) .
I am informed by Sir George Greenhill that there was also an earlier version
"showing the chair as it is in use to-day in Cairo and Egypt, the earliest
version of a taxi-chair, a pattern as early as Euclid and suggesting the nick­
name of the proposition." This recalls to my mind the remark of a friend to
whom I mentioned the subject and showed the figure of the proposition; he
observed at once on seeing it " B u t I should have said it was more like a sedan
chair," the large square suggesting to him the actual chair and the two smaller
squares the two bearers.
1

3. Dulcamon.
This name for I, 47 appears, as above mentioned, in Chaucer's Troilus
and Criseyde, in, 11. 9 3 0 - 3 , where Criseyde says :
4

1 am, til G o d me bettre minde sende,
A t d u l c a m o n , right at my wittes ende.'
Q u o d Pandarus, ' y e , nece, wol ye here?
D u l c a m o n called is " fieminge of wrecches."'

Billingsley, too, in his edition of Euclid (1570) observes of 1. 47 that " i t hath
bene commonly called of barbarous writers of the latter time Dulcamon."
Dulcamon (see Skeat's note ad loc.) seems to represent the Persian and
Arabic du 'Ikarnayn, lit. two-horned, from Pers. du, two, and karn, horn. T h e
name was applied to 1. 47 because the two smaller squares stick up like two
horns and, as the proposition is difficult, the word here takes the sense of
" puzzle " ; hence Criseyde was " at dulcamon " because she was perplexed
and at her wit's end.
4. Francisci tunica = " Franciskaner Kutte," " Franciscan's cowl."
This name is quoted by Weissenborn (Die Uebersetzungen des Euklid
durch Campano und Zamberti, p. 42) as given in a Geometrie by one Kunze.
T h e name is quite appropriate, one of the squares representing the hood
thrown back.
I I I . ; , 8.
I have already mentioned the names " Goose's F o o t " (Pes anseris) and
" P e a c o c k ' s T a i l " (Cauda pavonis) applied, suitably enough, to these pro­
positions respectively. T h e y come from Luca Paciuolo's edition of Euclid
published in 1509 (vide Weissenborn, ibid.).
1

O l d Cambridge men will recall a picture in some respects not unlike, though less
artistic than, the cartoon in La Vie Parisienne, I mean the painting of " T h e Man Loaded
with Mischief" which used to be over the door of the former inn of that name on the
St N e o t s R o a d , a short distance from C i m b r i d g e .

