INTRODUCTION.
CHAPTER
EUCLID

I.

A N D T H E TRADITIONS

ABOUT HIM.

A s in the case of the other great mathematicians of Greece, so in
Euclid's case, we have only the most meagre particulars of the life
and personality of the man.
Most of what we have is contained in the passage o f Proclus'
summary relating to him, which is as follows :
"Not much younger than these (sc. Hermotimus of Colophon and
Philippus of Medma) is Euclid, who put together the Elements, collect­
ing many of Eudoxus' theorems, perfecting many of Theaetetus', and
also bringing to irrefragable demonstration the things which were
only somewhat loosely proved b y his predecessors. This man lived
in the time of the first Ptolemy. F o r Archimedes, who came imme­
diately after the first (Ptolemy)', makes mention of Euclid: and,
further, they say that Ptolemy once asked him if there was in
geometry any shorter way than that of the elements, and he answered
that there was no royal road to geometry . H e is then younger than
the pupils of Plato but older than Eratosthenes and Archimedes; for
the latter were contemporary with one another, as Eratosthenes some­
where says."
This passage shows that even Proclus had no direct knowledge
of Euclid's birthplace or of the date of his birth or death. H e pro­
ceeds b y inference. Since Archimedes lived just after the first
1

2

4

1
1

Proclus, ed. Friedlein, p. 68, 6—to.
The word yiyore
must apparently mean " nourished," as Heiberg understands it

(Litterargeschichtliche

Studitn

iiber

Euklid,

1882, p. 26), not "was born," as Hankel took

it: otherwise part of Proclus' argument would lose its cogency.
So Heiberg understands Ari/iaXciw Tip rptbrtf
(sc. IlTo\e/ioi<(i). Friedlein's text has
/cal between i*if}a\ln>
and rip rptbnp;
and it is right to remark that another reading is
KCU tv Tip Troiir^j (without inPaXibr)
which has been translated "in hisfirstbook," by which
is understood On the Sphere and Cylinder
I . , where (r) in Prop. 2 are the words " let BC
be made equal to D by the second (proposition) of the first of Euclid's (books)," and (2) in
Prop. 6 the words " For these things are handed down in the Elements " (without the name
of Euclid). Heiberg thinks the former passage is referred to, and that Proclus must
therefore have had before him the words " by the second of the first of Euclid ": a fair proof
that they are genuine, though in themselves they would be somewhat suspicious.
The same story is told in Stobaeus, Eel. (it, p. 228, 30, ed. WachsmuthJ about
Alexander and Menaechmus. Alexander is represented as having asked Menaechmus to
teach him geometry concisely, but he replied : " O king, through the country there are royal
roads and roads for common citizens, but in geometry there is one road for all."
3

4

