Ptolemy, and Archimedes mentions Euclid, while there is an anecdote
about some Ptolemy and Euclid, therefore Euclid lived in the time of
the first Ptolemy.
W e may infer then from Proclus that Euclid was intermediate
between the first pupils of Plato and Archimedes. Now Plato died in
347/6, Archimedes lived 287-212, Eratosthenes c. 284-204 B.C. Thus
Euclid must have flourished c. 300 B.C., which date agrees well with
the fact that Ptolemy reigned from 306 to 283 B.C.
It is most probable that Euclid received his mathematical training
in Athens from the pupils of Plato; for most of the geometers who
could have taught him were of that school, and it was in Athens that
the older writers of elements, and the other mathematicians on whose
works Euclid's Elements depend, had lived and taught. He may
himself have been a Platonist, but this does not follow from the state­
ments of Proclus on the subject. Proclus says namely that he was of
the school of Plato and in close touch with that philosophy . But
this was only an attempt of a New Platonist to connect Euclid with
his philosophy, as is clear from the next words in the same sentence,
" for which reason also he set before himself, as the end of the whole
Elements, the construction of the so-called Platonic figures." It is
evident that it was only an idea of Proclus' own to infer that Euclid
was a Platonist because his Elements end with the investigation of
the five regular solids, since a later passage shows him hard put to
it to reconcile the view that the construction of the five regular solids
was the end and aim of the Elements with the obvious fact that they
were intended to supply a foundation for the study of geometry in
general, " t o make perfect the understanding of the learner in regard
to the whole of geometry ." T o get out of the difficulty he says* that,
if one should ask him what was the aim (O-KOTTOS) of the treatise, he
would reply b y making a distinction between Euclid's intentions
(1) as regards the subjects with which his investigations are concerned,
(2) as regards the learner, and would say as regards (1) that "the
whole of the geometer's argument is concerned with the cosmic
figures."
This latter statement is obviously incorrect
It is true
that Euclid's Elements end with the construction of the five regular
solids; but the planimetrical portion has no direct relation to them,
and the arithmetical no relation at a l l ; the propositions about them
are merely the conclusion of the stereometrical division of the work.
One thing is however certain, namely that Euclid taught, and
founded a school, at Alexandria. This is clear from the remark of
Pappus about Apollonius : " he spent a very long time with the
pupils of Euclid at Alexandria, and it was thus that he acquired
such a scientific habit of thought."
It is in the same passage that Pappus makes a remark which
might, to an unwary reader, seem to throw some light on the
1

2

4

1

Proclus, p. 68, 20, Kal TT} vpoaipimi
St IlXaruviKbs
ian Kal
ibid. p. 7 1 , 8.
* ibid. p. 70, 19 sqq.
* Pappus, VII. p. 678, 10—12, av<rx°Xd<ras
rots iirb EmXelSov
rXeiffrov
xpbyov,
80ev £<rx ^ V TOta&rtiv
obx dpadij.

tpCKoaotplq. TOVTV

oixetos.

3

e

Ka

T

V

p.aSr)Ta.Ts in ' AXe(twlpclo

