CH. i]

EUCLID A N D TRADITIONS ABOUT HIM

3

personality of Euclid. H e is speaking about Apollonius' preface
to the first book of his Conies, where he says that Euclid had not
completely worked out the synthesis of the " three- and four-line
locus," which in fact was not possible without some theorems first
discovered by himself.
Pappus says on this : " Now Euclid—
regarding Aristaeus as deserving credit for the discoveries he had
already made in conies, and without anticipating him or wishing to
construct anew the same system (such was his scrupulous fairness and
his exemplary kindliness towards all who could advance mathematical
science to however small an extent), being moreover in no wise con­
tentious and, though exact, yet no braggart like the other [Apollonius]
—wrote so much about the locus as was possible by means of the
conies of Aristaeus, without claiming completeness for his demonstra­
tions." It is however evident, when the passage is examined in its
context, that Pappus is not following any tradition in giving this
account of Euclid: he was offended by the terms of Apollonius'
reference to Euclid, which seemed to him unjust, and he drew a
fancy picture of Euclid in order to show Apollonius in a relatively
unfavourable light.
Another story is told of Euclid which one would like to believe true.
According to Stobaeus , " some one who had begun to read geometry
with Euclid, when he had learnt the first theorem, asked E u c l i d , ' But
what shall I get bylearning these things ?' Euclid called his slave
and said ' Give him threepence, since he must make gain out of what
he learns.'"
In the middle ages most translators and editors spoke of Euclid
as Euclid of Megara.
This description arose out of a confusion
between our Euclid and the philosopher Euclid of Megara who lived
about 400 B.C. T h e first trace of this confusion appears in Valerius
Maximus (in the time of Tiberius) who says* that Plato, on being
appealed to for a solution of the problem of doubling the cubical
altar, sent the inquirers to "Euclid the geometer." There is no doubt
about the reading, although an early commentator on Valerius
Maximus wanted to correct " Eucliden " into " E u d o x u m " and this
correction is clearly right. But, if Valerius Maximus took Euclid the
geometer for a contemporary of Plato, it could only be through
confusing him with Euclid of Megara. The first specific reference to
Euclid as Euclid of Megara belongs to the 14th century, occurring in
the virofivr)/ia,TUT/jLol of Theodorus Metochita (d. 1332) who speaks of
" Euclid of Megara, the Socratic philosopher, contemporary of Plato,"
as the author of treatises on plane and solid geometry, data, optics
etc.: and a Paris MS. of the 14th century has " Euclidis philosophi
Socratici liber elementorum."
The misunderstanding was general
in the period from Campanus' translation (Venice 1482) to those of
Tartaglia (Venice 1565) and Candalla (Paris 1566).
But one
Constantinus Lascaris (d. about 1493) had already made the proper
1

2

1

Pappus, v n . pp. 676, 15—678, 6. Hultsch, it is true, brackets the whole passage
pp. 676, t$—6j8,
15, but apparently on the ground of the diction only.
'

Stobaeus, I.e.

' V I I I . I I , ext.

I.

