distinction by saying of our Euclid that " he was different from him
of Megara of whom Laertius wrote, and who wrote dialogues "*; and
to Commandinus belongs the credit of being the first translator* to
put the matter beyond doubt: " Let us then free a number of people
from the error by which they have been induced to believe that our
Euclid is the same as the philosopher of Megara" etc.
Another idea, that Euclid was born at Gela in Sicily, is due to tne
same confusion, being based on Diogenes Laertius' description* of the
philosopher Euclid as being " o f Megara, or, according to some, of
Gela, as Alexander says in the Ata8o%ot."
In view of the poverty of Greek tradition on the subject even as
early as the time of Proclus (410-485 A.D.), we must necessarily take
cum grano the apparently circumstantial accounts of Euclid given by
Arabian authors; and indeed the origin of their stories can be
explained as the result (1) of the Arabian tendency to romance, and
(2) of misunderstandings.
We read that " Euclid, son of Naucrates, grandson of Zenarchus',
called the author of geometry, a philosopher of somewhat ancient
date, a Greek by nationality domiciled at Damascus, born at Tyre,
most learned in the science of geometry, published a most excellent
and most useful work entitled the foundation or elements of geometry,
a subject in which no more general treatise existed before among the
Greeks: nay, there was no one even of later date who did not walk
in his footsteps and frankly profess his doctrine. Hence also Greek,
Roman and Arabian geometers not a few, who undertook the task
of illustrating this work, published commentaries, scholia, and notes
upon it, and made an abridgment of the work itself. For this reason
the Greek philosophers used to post up on the doors of their schools
the well-known notice : ' L e t no one come to our school, who has not
first learned the elements of Euclid.'" The details at the beginning
of this extract cannot be derived from Greek sources, for even Proclus
did not know anything about Euclid's father, while it was not the
Greek habit to record the names of grandfathers, as the Arabians
commonly did. Damascus and T y r e were no doubt brought in to
gratify a desire which the Arabians always showed to connect famous
Greeks in some way or other with the East. Thus Naslraddin, the
translator of the Elements, who was of Tus in Khurasan, actually
makes Euclid out to have been " Thusinus " also*. T h e readiness of
the Arabians to run away with an idea is illustrated by the last words
4

1

Letter to Femandus Acuna, printed in Maurolycus, Historia
Siciliae,
fol. 11 r. (see
Heiberg, Euklid-Studien,
pp. 22—3, 25).
Preface to translation (Pisauri, 1572).
* Diog. L. 11. 106, p. 58 ed. Cobet.
Casiri, Bibliotheca
Arabico-Hispana
Escurialensis,
I. p. 339. Casiri's source is alQifp (d. 1248), the author of the Tdrikh
al-Hukama,
a collection of biographies of phi­
losophers, mathematicians, astronomers etc.
* The Fihrist
says "son of Naucrates, the son of Berenice (?)" (see Suter's translation in
3

4

Abhandlungen

zur

Gesch.

d. Math,

VI. Heft, 1892,

p.

16).

* The same predilection made the Arabs describe "Pythagoras as a pupil of the wise
Salomo, Hipparchus as the exponent of Chaldaean philosophy or as the Chaldaean, Archi­
medes as an Egyptian etc. (Haji Khalfa, Lexicon Bibliographicum,
and Casiri).

