EUCLID AND TRADITIONS ABOUT HIM

5

of the extract. Everyone knows the story of Plato's inscription over
the porch of the A c a d e m y : " let no one unversed in geometry enter
my doors " ; the A r a b turned geometry into Euclid's geometry, and
told the story of Greek philosophers in general and "their Academies."
Equally remarkable are the Arabian accounts of the relation of
Euclid and Apollonius . According to them the Elements were
originally written, not by Euclid, but by a man whose name was
Apollonius, a carpenter, who wrote the work in 15 books or sections'.
In the course of time some of the work was lost and the rest became
disarranged, so that one of the kings at Alexandria who desired to
study geometry and to master this treatise in particular first questioned
about it certain learned men who visited him and then sent for Euclid
who was at that time famous as a geometer, and asked him to revise
and complete the work and reduce it to order. Euclid then re-wrote
it in 13 books which were thereafter known by his name. (According
to another version Euclid composed the 13 books out of commentaries
which he had published on two books of Apollonius on conies and
out of introductory matter added to the doctrine of the five regular
solids.) T o the thirteen books were added two more books, the work
of others (though some attribute these also to Euclid) which contain
several things not mentioned by Apollonius. According to another
version Hypsicles, a pupil of Euclid at Alexandria, offered to the
king and published Books XIV. and XV., it being also stated that
Hypsicles had " discovered" the books, by which it appears to be
suggested that Hypsicles had edited them from materials left by Euclid.
W e observe here the correct statement that Books x i v . and XV.
were not written by Euclid, but along with it the incorrect informa­
tion that Hypsicles, the author of Book XIV., wrote Book XV. also.
The whole of the fable about Apollonius having preceded Euclid
and having written the Elements appears to have been evolved out of
the preface to Book XIV. by Hypsicles, and in this w a y ; the Book
must in early times have been attributed to Euclid, and the inference
based upon this assumption was left uncorrected afterwards when it
was recognised that Hypsicles was the author. T h e preface is worth
quoting:
" Basilides of Tyre, O Protarchus, when he came to Alexandria
and met my father, spent the greater part of his sojourn with him on
account of their common interest in mathematics. A n d once, when
1

1

The authorities for these statements quoted by Casiri and rlaji Khalfa are al-Kindi's
tract de instittito
libri Euclidis
(al-Kindi died about 873) and a commentary by Qadizade
ar-Ruml (d. about 1440) on a book called Ashk&l at-ta' sis (fundamental propositions) by
Ashraf Shamsaddin as-Samarqandi (c. 1276) consisting of elucidations of 35 propositions
selected from the first books of Euclid. Nasiraddin likewise says that Euclid cut out two of
15 books of elements then existing and published the rest under his own name. According to
Qadizade the king heard that there was a celebrated geometer named Euclid at Tyre: Nasir­
addin says that he sent for Euclid of Tus.
So says the Fihrist.
Suter (op. eit. p. 49) thinks that the author of the Fihrist did not
suppose Apollonius of Perga to be the writer of the Elements,
as later Arabian authorities
did, but that he distinguished another Apollonius whom he calls "a carpenter." Suter's
argument is based on the fact that the Fihrists
article on Apollonius (of Perga) says nothing
of the Elements;
and that it gives the three great mathematicians, Euclid, Archimedes and
Apollonius, in the correct chronological order.
a

