examining the treatise written by Apollonius about the comparison
between the dodecahedron and the icosahedron inscribed in the same
sphere, (showing) what ratio they have to one another, they thought
that Apollonius had not expounded this matter properly, and
accordingly they emended the exposition, as I was able to learn
from my father.
A n d I myself, later, fell in with another book
published by Apollonius, containing a demonstration relating to the
subject, and I was greatly interested in the investigation of the
problem. T h e book published by Apollonius is accessible to all—
for it has a large circulation, having apparently been carefully written
out later—but I decided to send you the comments which seem to
me to be necessary, for you will through your proficiency in mathe­
matics in general and in geometry in particular form an expert
judgment on what I am about to say, and you will lend a kindly ear
to my disquisition for the sake of your friendship to my father and
your goodwill to me."
T h e idea that Apollonius preceded Euclid must evidently have
been derived from the passage just quoted. It explains other things
besides. Basilides must have been confused with /3acn\ev<;, and we
have a probable explanation of the " Alexandrian king," and of the
"learned men who visited" Alexandria. It is possible also that in
the " Tyrian " of Hypsicles' preface we have the origin of the notion
that Euclid was born in Tyre.
These inferences argue, no doubt,
very defective knowledge of G r e e k : but we could expect no better
from those who took the Organon of Aristotle to be " instrumentum
musicum pneumaticum," and who explained the name of Euclid,
which they variously pronounced as Uclides or /eludes, to be com­
pounded of Ucli a key, and Dis a measure, or, as some say, geometry,
so that Uclides is equivalent to the key of geometry!
Lastly the alternative version, given in brackets above, which says
that Euclid made the Elements out of commentaries which he wrote
on two books of Apollonius on conies and prolegomena added to the
doctrine of the five solids, seems to have arisen, through a like
confusion, out of a later passage* in Hypsicles' Book x i v . : " A n d this
is expounded by Aristaeus in the book entitled 'Comparison of the five
figures,' and by Apollonius in the second edition of his comparison of
the dodecahedron with the icosahedron." T h e " doctrine of the five
solids " in the Arabic must be the " Comparison of the five figures"
in the passage of Hypsicles, for nowhere else have we any information
about a work bearing this title, nor can the Arabians have had. The
reference to the two books of Apollonius on conies will then be the
result of mixing up the fact that Apollonius wrote a book on conies
with the second edition of the other work mentioned by Hypsicles.
W e do not find elsewhere in Arabian authors any mention of a
commentary by Euclid on Apollonius and Aristaeus: so that the
story in the passage quoted is really no more than a variation of the
fable that the Elements were the work of Apollonius.
1

Heiberg's Euclid, vol. v. p. 6.

