V. DEFF. I, 2]

INTRODUCTORY

NOTE

"3

It seems probable, as indicated by Tannery (be. cit.), that the theory
of proportions and the principle of similitude took, in the earliest Greek
geometry, an earlier place than they do in Euclid, but that, in consequence
of the discovery of the incommensurable, the treatment of the subject was
fundamentally remodelled in the period between Pythagoras and Eudoxus.
An indication of this is afforded by the clever device used in Euclid 1, 44
for applying to a given straight line a parallelogram equal to a given triangle;
the equality of the "complements" in a parallelogram is there used for doing
what is practically finding a fourth proportional to three given straight lines.
Thus Euclid was no doubt following for the subject-matter of Books I.—iv.
what had become the traditional method, and this is probably one of the
reasons why proportions and similitude are postponed till as late as Books
v., vi.
It is a remarkable fact that the theory of proportions is twice treated in
Euclid, in Book v. with reference to magnitudes in general, and in Book vii.
with reference to the particular case of numbers. T h e latter exposition
referring only to commensurables may be taken to represent fairly the theory
of proportions at the stage which it had reached before the great extension of
it made by Eudoxus. The differences between the definitions etc. in Books v.
and vii. will appear as we go o n ; but the question naturally arises, why did
Euclid not save himself so much repetition and treat numbers merely as a
particular case of magnitude, referring back to the corresponding more
general propositions of Book v. instead of proving the same propositions
over again for numbers? It could not have escaped him that numbers
fall under the conception of magnitude. Aristotle had plainly indicated
that magnitudes may be numbers when he observed (Anal. post. 1. 7,
75 b 4) that you cannot adapt the arithmetical method of proof to the
properties of magnitudes if the magnitudes are not numbers.
Further
Aristotle had remarked (Anal. post. 1. 5, 74 a 17) that the proposition that
the terms of a proportion can be taken alternately was at one time proved
separately for numbers, lines, solids and times, though it was possible to prove
it for all by one demonstration; but, because there was no common name
comprehending them all, namely numbers, lengths, times and solids, and their
character was different, they were taken separately. Now however, he adds,
the proposition is proved generally. Yet Euclid says nothing to connect
the two theories of proportion even when he comes in x. 5 to a proportion
two terms of which are magnitudes and two are numbers (" Commensurable
magnitudes have to one another the ratio which a number has to a number").
T h e probable explanation of the phenomenon is that Euclid simply followed
tradition and gave the two theories as he found them. This would square
with the remark in Pappus (VII. p. 678) as to Euclid's fairness to others and
his readiness to give them credit for their work.

DEFINITIONS.

1. A magnitude is a part of a magnitude, the less of
the greater, when it measures the greater.
2. The greater is a multiple of the less when it is
measured by the less.

