V. DEFF.]

DEFINITIONS

14. Composition of a ratio means taking the ante­
cedent together with the consequent as one in relation to
the consequent by itself.
15. Separation of a ratio means taking the excess
by which the antecedent exceeds the consequent in relation
to the consequent by itself.
16. Conversion of a ratio means taking the ante­
cedent in relation to the excess by which the antecedent
exceeds the consequent.
17. A ratio ex aequali arises when, there being several
magnitudes and another set equal to them in multitude which
taken two and two are in the same proportion, as the first is
to the last among the first magnitudes, so is the first to the
last among the second magnitudes ;
Or, in other words, it means taking the extreme terms
by virtue of the. removal of the intermediate terms.
18. A perturbed proportion arises when, there being
three magnitudes and another set equal to them in multitude,
as antecedent is to consequent among the first magnitudes,
so is antecedent to consequent among the second magnitudes,
while, as the consequent is to a third among the first
magnitudes, so is a third to the antecedent among the second
magnitudes.
DEFINITION I.
M*po« fori /«'yc0os ficytdovs TO i\a<r<rov rov fiutpvos,

orav Kwrafitrpj) TO

The word part (/«pos) is here used in the restricted sense of a submultiple
or an aliquot part as distinct from the more general sense in which it is used
in the Common Notion (5) which says that " the whole is greater than the
part." It is used in the" same restricted sense in vn. Def. 3, which is the same
definition as this with "number" (apifyio's) substituted for "magnitude."
vn. Def. 4, keeping up the restriction, says that, when a number does not
measure another number, it is parts (in the plural), not a part of it. Thus,
1, 2, or 3, is a part of 6. but 4 is not a part of 6 but parts.
T h e same
distinction between the restricted and the more general sense of the word
part appears in Aristotle, Metaph. 1023 b 1 2 : "In one sense a part is
that into which quantity (TO 7roo-oV) can anyhow be divided; for that which is
taken away from quantity, qud quantity, is always called a 'part' of it, as
e.g. two is said to be in a sense a part of three. But in another sense a
'part' is only what measures (TO KaTa/ncrpourra) such quantities. Thus two
is in one sense said to be a part of three, in the other not."

