BOOK V

[v. VETF. 2, 3

DEFINITION 2.
noXXo7rXao-iov Si TO juct£ov TOC iXoTTOi'09, OTOI> Kara/in pijrai vwo TOV
<XOTTOVO9.

DEFINITION 3.
Aoyos tori 8uo /jLtytdav o'iury€v<Sv tj KOTO injXoeoTirra iroia o-^eo-is.
The best explanation of the definitions of ra/fo and proportion that I have
seen is that of De Morgan, which will be found in the articles under those
titles in the Penny Cyclopaedia, Vol. x i x . ( 1 8 4 1 ) ; and in the following notes
I shall draw largely from these articles. Very valuable also are the notes on
the definitions of Book v. given by Hankel (fragment on Euclid published as
an appendix to his work Zur Geschichte der Mathematik in Atterthum und
Mittelalter, 1874).
There has been controversy as to what is the proper translation of the
word m)\iKorris in the definition. o-\iarit KOTO HTJAUCO'TT/TO has generally been
translated "relation in respect of quantity."
Upon this De Morgan remarks
that it makes nonsense of the definition; " for magnitude has hardly a
different meaning from quantity, and a relation of magnitudes with respect to
quantity may give a clear idea to those who want a word to convey a notion
of architecture with respect to building or of battles with respect to fighting,
and to no others." T h e true interpretation De Morgan, following Wallis and
Gregory, takes to be quantuplicity, referring to the number of times one
magnitude is contained in the other. For, he says, we cannot describe
magnitude in language without quantuplicitative reference to other magni­
tude ; hence he supposes that the definition simply conveys the fact that the
mode of expressing quantity in terms of quantity is entirely based upon the
notion of quantuplicity or that relation of which we take cognizance when we
find how many times one is contained in the other. While all the rest of
De Morgan's observations on the definition are admirable, it seems to me
that on this question of the proper translation of m/XtKbVijs he is in error. H e
supports his view mainly by reference (1) to the definition of a compounded
ratio usually given as the 5th definition of Book vi., which speaks of the
mjXiKonrrfs of two ratios being multiplied together, and (2) to the comments
of Eutocius and a scholiast on this definition.
Eutocius says namely
(Archimedes, ed. Heiberg, IB. p. 120) that "the term >n/Xt(coVi/s is evidently
used of the number from which the given ratio is called, as (among others)
Nicomachus says in his first book on music and Heron in his commentary
on the Introduction to Arithmetic." But it now appears certain that this
definition is an interpolation; it is never used, it is not found in Campanus,
and Peyrard's MS. only has it in the margin. At the same time it is clear
that, if the definition is admitted at all, any commentator would be obliged to
explain it in the way that Eutocius does, whether the explanation was consistent
with the proper meaning of miXumnp or not. Hence we must look elsewhere
for the meaning of HTJXIKO? and in/XticorTjs. If we do this, I think we shall find
no case in which the words have the sense attributed to them by De Morgan.
The real meaning of TTI/XIKOS is how great.
It is so used by Aristotle, e.g. in
Eth. Nic. v. 10, 1 1 3 4 b 1 1 , where he speaks of a man's child being as it were
a part of him so long as he is of a certain age («u>? av jj mjXtKov). Again
Nicomachus, to whom Eutocius appeals, himself (1. 2, 5, p. 5, ed. Hoche)
distinguishes JTJ/XIKOS as referring to magtiitude, while TTOO-O'S refers to multitude.
So does Iamblichus in his commentary on Nicomachus (p. 8, 3 — 5 ) ; besides
which Iamblichus distinguishes wriKiKov as the subject of geometry, being con-

