tinuous, and JTOO-OV as the subject of arithmetic, being discrete, and speaks of a
point being the origin of mjAocoi> as a unit is of iroo-oV, and so on. Similarly,
Ptolemy (Syntaxis, ed. Heiberg, p. 31) speaks of the size (JITJXIKOTIJS) of the
chords in a circle (irtpi T»/S irriKiKortfro's TWV iv T<3 KVK\<O tiOtiwv). Consequently
I think we can only translate m/Xucon/s in the definition as size. This
corresponds to Hankel's translation of it as " Grosse," though he uses this
same word for a concrete "magnitude" as well; size seems to me to give
the proper distinction between >T);XKCOTT;S and ueytSo?, as size is the attribute,
and a magnitude (in its ordinary mathematical sense) is the thing which
possesses the attribute of size.
The view that " relation in respect of size" is meant by the words in the
text is also confirmed, I think, by a later remark of De Morgan himself,
namely that a synonym for the word ratio may be found in the more in­
telligible term relative magnitude. In fact o-x«m in the definition corresponds
to relative and miKiKorifi to magnitude.
(By magnitude De Morgan here
means the attribute and not the thing possessing it.)
Of the definition as a whole Simson and Hankel express the opinion that
it is an interpolation. Hankel points to the fact that it is unnecessary and
moreover so vague as to be of no practical use, while the very use of the
expression rara mjXocoTjp-o seems to him suspicious, since the only other
place in which the word mjkiKOT-qs occurs in Euclid is the 5th definition of
Book vi., which is admittedly not genuine. Yet the definition of ratio appears
in all the MSS., the only variation being that some add the words irpoi aXK-qKa,
"to one another," which are rejected by Heiberg as an interpolation of
T h e o n ; and on the whole there seems to be no sufficient ground for regarding
it as other than genuine. The true explanation of its presence would appear
to be substantially that given by Barrow (Leeliones Cantabrig., London, 1684,
Lect. HI. of 1666), namely that Euclid inserted it for completeness' sake, more
for ornament than for use, intending to give the learner a general notion of
ratio by means of a metaphysical, rather than a mathematical definition ; " for
metaphysical it is and not, properly speaking, mathematical, since nothing
depends on it or is deduced from it by mathematicians, nor, as I think, can
anything be deduced." This is confirmed by the fact that there is no
definition of Xdyos in Book vn., and it could equally have been dispensed
with here. Similarly De Morgan observes that Euclid never attempts this
vague sort of definition except when, dealing with a well-known term of
common life, he wishes to bring it into geometry with something like an
expressed meaning which may aid the conception of the thing, though it does
not furnish a perfect criterion. Thus we may compare the definition with
that of a straight line, where Euclid merely calls the reader's attention to the
well-known term tvQtla yoa/i/iij, tries how far he can present the conception
which accompanies it in other words, and trusts for the correct use of the
term to the axioms (or postulates) which the universal conception of a straight
line makes self-evident.
We have now to trace as clearly as possible the development of the
conception ot Adyos, ratio, or relative magnitude. In its primitive sense
Xoyos was only used of a ratio between commensurables, i.e. a ratio which
could be expressed, and the manner of expressing it is indicated in the
proposition, Eucl. x. 5, which proves that commensurable magnitudes have to
one another the ratio which a number has to a number. That this was the
primitive meaning of Adyos is proved by the use of the term dAoyos for the
incommensurable, which means irrational in the sense of not having a ratio
to something taken as rational (pip-ds).

