Euclid himself shows us how we are to set about finding the ratio, or
relative magnitude, of two commensurable magnitudes. H e gives, in x. 3,
practically our ordinary method of finding the greatest common measure.
If A, B be two magnitudes of which B is the less, we cut oft* from A a part
equal to B, from the remainder a part equal to B, and so on, until we leave a
remainder less than B, say R^
We measure off R f r c n B in the same way
until a remainder R is left which is less than J ? , . We repeat the process
with R R„ and so on, until we find a remainder which is contained in the
preceding remainder a certain number of times exactly. If account is taken
of the number of times each magnitude is contained (with something over,
except at the last) in that upon which it is measured, we can calculate how
many times the last remainder is contained in A and how many times the
last remainder is contained in B; and we can thus express the ratio of A to
B as the ratio of one number to another.
But it may happen that the two magnitudes have no common measure,
i.e. are incommensurable, in which case the process described would never
come to an end and the means of expression would fail; the magnitudes
would then have no ratio in the primitive sense. But the word \ayos, ratio,
acquires in Euclid, Book v., a wider sense covering the relative magnitude of
incommensurables as well as commensurables; as stated in Euclid's 4th
definition, "magnitudes are said to have a ratio to one another which can,
when multiplied, exceed one another," and finite incommensurables have this
property as much as commensurables. De Morgan explains the manner of
transition from the narrower to the wider signification of ratio as follows.
"Since the relative magnitude of two quantities is always shown by the
quantuplicitative mode of expression, when that is possible, and since pro­
portional quantities (pairs which have the same relative magnitude) are pairs
which have the same mode (if possible) of expression by means of each other;
in all such cases sameness of relative magnitude leads to sameness of mode of
expression; or proportion is sameness of ratios (in the primitive sense). But
sameness of relative magnitude may exist where quantuplicitative expression
is impossible; thus the diagonal of a larger square is the same compared with
its side as the diagonal of a smaller square compared with its side. It is an
easy transition to speak of sameness of ratio even in this case; that is, to use
the term ratio in the sense of relative magnitude, that word having originally
only a reference to the mode of expressing relative magnitude, in cases which
allow of a particular mode of expression. T h e word irrational (aAoyos) does
not make any corresponding change but continues to have its primitive
meaning, namely, incapable of quantuplicitative expression."
x

t

u

It remains to consider how we are to describe the relative magnitude of
two incommensurables of the same kind. That they have a definite relation
is certain. Suppose, for precision, that 5 is the side of a square, D its
diagonal; then, if 5 is given, any alteration in D or any error in D would
make the figure cease to be a square. At the same time, a person altogether
ignorant of the relative magnitude of D and 5 might say that drawing two
straight lines of length 5 so as to form a right angle and joining the ends by
a straight line, the length of which would accordingly be D, does not help
him to realise the relative magnitude, but that he would like to know how
many diagonals make an exact number of sides. We should have to reply
that no number of diagonals whatever makes an exact number of sides; but
that he may mention any fraction of the side, a hundredth, a thousandth or
a millionth, and that we will then express the diagonal with an error not so
great as that fraction. W e then tell him that 1,000,000 diagonals exceed

