1,414,213 sides but fall short of 1,414,214 sides; consequently the diagonal
lies between i 4 i 4 2 i 3 and 1-414214 times the side, and these differ only by
one-millionth of the side, so that the error in the diagonal is less still. T o
enable him to continue the process further, we show him how to perform the
arithmetical operation of approximating to the value of J2.
This gives the
means of carrying the approximation to any degree of accuracy that may be
desired. In the power, then, of carrying approximations of this kind as far as
we please lies that of expressing the ratio, so far as expression is possible, and
of comparing the ratio with others as accurately as if expression had been
possible.
Euclid was of course aware of this, as were probably others before him ;
though the actual approximations to the values of ratios of incommensurables
of which we find record in the works of the great Greek geometers are very
few. The history of such approximations up to Archimedes is, so far as
material was available, sketched in The Works of Archimedes (pp. lxxvii and
following); and it is sufficient here to note the facts (1) that Plato, and,even
the Pythagoreans, were familiar with *- as an approximation to J2, (2) that
the method of finding any number of successive approximations by the system
of side- and diagonal-numbers
described by Theon of Smyrna was also
Pythagorean (cf. the note above on Euclid, 11. 9, 10), (3) that Archimedes,
without a word of preliminary explanation, gives out that
-

gives approximate values for the square roots of several large numbers, and
proves that the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter is less
than $ } but greater than 3 ^ J , (4) that the first approach to the rapidity with
which the decimal system enables us to approximate to the value of surds
was furnished by the method of sexagesimal fractions, which was almost as
convenient to work with as the method of decimals, and which appears fully
developed in Ptolemy's o-iJiTafis. A number consisting of a whole number
and any fraction was under this system represented as so many units, so
many of the fractions which we should denote by j ^ , so many of those which
3
3 an
we should write (TV) , (rfc), d
Theon of Alexandria shows us how
to extract the square root of 4500 in this sexagesimal system, and, to show
how effective it was, it is only necessary to mention that Ptolemy gives
s

+

+

3 S

a

n

a

r o x m l a t

o

o n

o n

t 0

ifo' lo*
PP
'
V3> which approximation is equivalent
to 17320509 in the ordinary decimal notation and is therefore correct to
6 places.
Between Dfcf. 3 and Def. 4 two manuscripts and Campanus insert " Pro­
portion is the sameness of ratios" (aWAoyta Si rj r w X.6ya>v TO.VTOTT)S), and even
the best MS. has it in the margin. It would be altogether out of place, since
it is not till Def. 5 that it is explained what sameness of ratios is. T h e words
are an interpolation later than Theon (Heiberg, Vol. v. pp. xxxv, lxxxix),
and are no doubt taken from arithmetical works (cf. Nicomachus and Theon
of Smyrna). It is true that Aristotle says similarly, " Proportion is equality
of ratios" (Eth. Nic. v. 6, 1 1 3 1 a 31), and he appears to be quoting from
the Pythagoreans; but the reference is to numbers.
Similarly two MSS. (inferior) insert after Def. 7 "Proportion is the similarity
(6/IOIOTIJS) of ratios." Here too we have a mere interpolation.
1

