BOOK V

120

[v. DEFF. 4, s

DEFINITION 4.
Aoyov JWl" irpo9 a\Xr)\a
dXXyjXwv vircpfyeiv.

fityiSi) Aeycrai, a owaTai 7roA\air\ao-ia£o/«va

This definition supplements the last one. De Morgan says that it amounts
to saying that the magnitudes are of the same species. But this can hardly
be all; the definition seems rather to be meant, on the one hand, to exclude
the relation of a finite magnitude to a magnitude of the same kind which is
either infinitely great or infinitely small, and, even more, to emphasise the
fact that the term ratio, as defined in the preceding definition, and about to
be used throughout the book, includes the relation between any two incom­
mensurable as well as between any two commensurable finite magnitudes of
the same kind. Hence, while De Morgan seems to regard the extension of
the meaning of ratio to include the relative magnitude of incommensurables
as, so to speak, taking place between Def. 3 and Def. 5, the 4th definition
appears to show that it is ratio in its extended sense that is being defined in
Def. 3.

DEFINITION 5.
*Ei> T<p OVTW Adyai fieye&rj AeyeTcu etvai irpwjov wpos SevTcpop Kal rpvrov vrpos
TCTdprov, orav T<i TOW jrpwTou nal rpirov to-axi? 7roAA(nrAao-ia TISK TOV Scvrcpov
Kal rerdprov icara; 7roAAa7rAao iG>i' Kaff biroiovovv TroWxivXaataa/jioy cKartpov
cxarcpov
a/xa virtpi\rj 17 a/xa to*a rj a/ia cWtiTrrj krjipdevra xaraAA^Aa.
1

In my translation of this definition I have compromised between an
attempted literal translation and the more expanded version of Simson. The
difficulty in the way of an exactly literal translation is due to the fact that the
words (KCLP biroLovinn' iroXkairKaa-iao-fwv) signifying that the equimultiples in
each case are any equimultiples whatever occur only once in the Greek, though
they apply both to Ta...to-aKis 7roAAa7rAao-ia in the nominative and T<3V...10-0x19
iroAAaTi-Aao-iW in the genitive. I have preferred "alike" to "simultaneously"
as a translation of a/ta because " simultaneously " might suggest that time was
of the essence of the matter, whereas what is meant is that any particular
comparison made between the equimultiples must be made between the same
equimultiples of the two pairs respectively, not that they need to be compared
at the same time.
Aristotle has an allusion to a definition of "the same ratio" in Topics
viii. 3, 158 b 29 : " In mathematics too some things appear to be not easy to
prove (ypd<pto-6ai) for want of a definition, e.g. that the parallel to the side
which cuts a plane [a parallelogram] divides the straight line [the other side]
and the area similarly. But, when the definition is expressed, the said property
is immediately manifest; for the areas and the straight lines have the same
ivravaipto-is,
and this is the definition of 'the same ratio.'"
Upon this
passage Alexander says similarly, "This is the definition of proportionals
which the ancients used: magnitudes are proportional to one another which
have (or show) the same avdwfxupto-i's, and Aristotle has called the latter
ovTovoipeo-ts." Heiberg (Mathematisches zu Aristoteles, p. 22) thinks that
Aristotle is alluding to the fact that the proposition referred to could not be
rigorously proved so long as the Pythagorean definition applicable to com­
mensurable magnitudes only was adhered to, and is quoting the definition
belonging to the complete theory of E u d o x u s ; whence, in view of the positive
statement of Aristotle that the definition quoted is the definition of "the same
ratio," it would appear that the Euclidean definition (which Heiberg describes
as a careful and exact paraphrase of dvravaipio-K) is Euclid's own. I do not

