feel able to subscribe to this view, which seems to me to involve very grave
difficulties.
The Euclidean definition is regularly appealed to in Book v. as
the criterion of magnitudes being in proportion, and the use of it would appear
to constitute the whole essence of the new general theory of proportion; if then
this theory is due to Eudoxus, it seems impossible to believe that the definition
was not also due to him. Certainly the definition given by Aristotle would
be no substitute for it; aVflixpaipto-is and dvravaipto-K are words almost as
vague and " metaphysical" (as Barrow would say) as the words used to define
ratio, and it is difficult to see how any mathematical facts could be deduced
from such a definition.
Consider for a moment the etymology of the words.
v<paip«rtt or a r a / w i s means "removal," "taking away" or "destruction" of
a thing; and the prefix o m indicates that the "taking away" from one
magnitude answers to, corresponds with, alternates with, the " taking away "
from the other. So far therefore as the etymology goes, the word seems
rather to suggest the " taking away " of corresponding fractions, and therefore
to suit the old imperfect theory of proportion rather than the new one. Thus
Waitz (ad loc.) paraphrases the definition as meaning that " as many parts as
are taken from one magnitude, so many are at the same time taken from the
other as well." A possible explanation would seem to be that, though
Eudoxus had formulated the new definition, the old one was still current in
the text-books of Aristotle's time, and was taken by him as being a good
enough illustration of what he wished to bring out in the passage of the
Topics referred to.
From the revival of learning in Europe onwards the Euclidean definition
of proportion was the subject of much criticism. Campanus had failed to
understand it, had in fact misinterpreted it altogether, and he may have
misled others such as Ramus ( 1 5 1 5 — 7 2 ) , always a violently hostile critic of
Euclid. Among the objectors to it was no less a person than Galileo. F o r
particulars of the controversies on the subject down to Thomas Simpson
(Elem. of Geometry, Lond. 1800) the reader is referred to the Excursus at the
end of the second volume of Camerer's Euclid (1825). F o r us it is interesting
to note that the unsoundness of the usual criticisms of the definition was
never better exposed than by Barrow. Some of the objections, he pointed out
(Led. Cantabr. vn. of 1666), are due to misconception on the part of their authors
as to the nature of a definition.
Thus Euclid is required by these objectors
(e.g. Tacquet) to do the impossible and to show that what is predicated in the
definition is true of the thing defined, as if any one should be required to
show that the name "circle" was applicable to those figures alone which
have their radii all equal! As we are entitled to assign to such figures and
such figures only the name of " circle," so Euclid is entitled (" quamvis non
temere nec imprudenter at certis de causis iustis illis et idoneis ") to describe
a certain property which four magnitudes may have, and to call magnitudes
possessing that property magnitudes "in the same ratio." Others had argued
from the occurrence of the other definition of proportion in VII, Def. 20 that
Euclid was dissatisfied with the present one; Barrow pointed out that, on the
contrary, it was the fact that vn. Def. 20 was not adequate to cover the case
of incommensurables which made Euclid adopt the present definition here.
Lastly, he maintains, against those who descant on the "obscurity" of v.
Def. 5, that the supposed obscurity is due, partly no doubt to the inherent
difficulty of the subject of incommensurables, but also to faulty translators,
and most of all to lack of effort in the learner to grasp thoroughly the meaning
of words which, in themselves, are as clearly expressed as they could be.
T o come now to the merits of the case, the best defence and explanation

