BOOK

122

V

[ v . DEF. 5

of the definition that I have seen is that given by De Morgan. H e first
translates it, observes that it applies equally to commensurable or incom­
mensurable quantities because no attempt is made to measure one by an
aliquot part of another, and then proceeds thus.
" T h e two questions which must be asked, and satisfactorily answered,
previously to its [the definition's] reception, are as follows:
1. What right had Euclid, or any one else, to expect that the preceding
most prolix and unwieldy statement should be received by the beginner as
the definition of a relation the perception of which is one of the most common
acts of his mind, since it is performed on every occasion where similarity or
dissimilarity of figure is looked for or presents itself?
2. If the preceding question should be clearly answered, how can the
definition of proportion ever be used; or how is it possible to compare every
one of the infinite number of multiples of A with every one of the multiples
of . 5 ?
T o the first question we reply that not only is the test proposed by
Euclid tolerably simple, when more closely examined, but that it is, or might
be made to appear, an easy and natural consequence of those fundamental
perceptions with which it may at first seem difficult to compare it."
T o elucidate this De Morgan gives the following illustration.
Suppose there is a straight colonnade composed of equidistant columns
(which we will understand to mean the vertical lines forming the axes of the
columns respectively), the first of which is at a distance from a bounding wall
equal to the distance between consecutive columns. In front of the colonnade
let there be a straight row of equidistant railings (regarded as meaning their
axes), the first being at a distance from the bounding wall equal to the
distance between consecutive railings. Let the columns be numbered from
the wall, and also the railings. We suppose of course that the column distance
(say, C) and the railing distance (say, R) are different and that they may bear
to each other any ratio, commensurable or incommensurable; i.e. that there
need not go any exact number of railings to any exact number of columns.

W~
I

I
2

3

3
4

S

6

31
7

4
S

5
6
7
8
9
9 10 II 12 13 14 IB 18 17 18

If the construction be supposed carried on to any extent, a spectator can,
by mere inspection, and without measurement, compare C with R to any
degree of accuracy. F o r example, since the ioth railing falls between the 4th
and 5th columns, 10R is greater than 4 C and less than 5 C , and therefore R
lies between roths of C and y^ths of C. T o get a more accurate notion, the
ten-thousandth railing may be taken ; suppose it falls between the 4674th and
4675th columns. Therefore 10,000^ lies between 4 6 7 4 C and 4675C, or R lies
between VoVo- ^ TVOVO" °? V? There is no limit to the degree of accuracy
thus obtainable ; and the ratio of R to C is determined when the order of
distribution of the railings among the columns is assigned ad infinitum; or, in
other words, when the position of any giver railing can be found, as to the
numbers of the columns between which it lies. Any alteration, however
small, in the place of the first railing must at last affect the order of
distribution. Suppose e.g. that the first railing is moved from the wall by one
part in a thousand of the distance between the columns; then the second
railing is pushed forward by /TJTJC', the third by rwun^, and so on, so that
A N (

T

tt

