the railings after the thousandth are pushed forward by more than C ; i.e. the
order with respect to the columns is disarranged.
Now let it be proposed to make a model of the preceding construction in
which c shall be the column distance and r the railing distance. It needs no
definition of proportion, nor anything more than the conception which we
have of that term prior to definition (and with which we must show the agree­
ment of any definition that we may adopt), to assure us that C must be to R
in the same proportion as c to r if the model be truly formed. Nor is it
drawing too largely on that conception of proportion to assert that the
distribution of the railings among the columns in the model must be every­
where the same as in the original; for example, that the model would be out
of proportion if its 37th railing fell between the 18th and 19th columns, while
the 37th railing of the original fell between the 17th and 18th columns. Thus
the dependence of Euclid's definition upon common notions is settled; for the
obvious relation between the construction and its model which has just been
described contains the collection of conditions, the fulfilment of which,
according to Euclid, constitutes proportion. According to Euclid, whenever
mC exceeds, equals, or falls short of nR, then me must exceed, equal, or fall
short of nr; and, by the most obvious property of the constructions, according
as the »»th column comes after, opposite to, or before the «th railing in the
original, the wth column must come after, opposite to, or before the »th
railing in the correct model.
Thus the test proposed by Euclid is necessary. It is also sufficient. F o r
admitting that, to a given original with a given column-distance in the model,
there is one correct model railing distance (which must therefore be that
which distributes the railings among the columns as in the original), we have
seen that any other railing distance, however slightly different, would at last
give a different distribution; that is, the correct distance, and the correct
distance only, satisfies all the conditions required by Euclid's definition.
T h e use of the word distribution having been well learnt, says De Morgan,
the following way of stating the definition will be found easier than that of
Euclid. " Four magnitudes, A and B of one kind, and C and D of the same
or another kind, are proportional when all the multiples of A can be
distributed among the multiples of B in the same intervals as the correspond­
ing multiples of C among those of D." Or, whatever numbers m, n may be,
if mA lies between nB and (« + i)B, mC lies between nD and (n + i)D.
It is important to note that, if the test be always satisfied from and after
any given multiples of A and C, it must be satisfied before those multiples. F o r
instance, let the test be always satisfied from and after ioo^4 and 1 0 0 C ; and
let 5A and 5 C be instances for examination. Take any multiple of 5 which
will exceed 100, say 50 times five ; and let it be found on examination that
250^4 lies between 678Z? and 679.S ; then 250C lies between 678/? and
679/?. Divide by 50, and it follows that $A lies between i 3 § § . # and i 3 § J - 5 ,
and a fortiori between 13B and 14Z?. Similarly, 5 C lies between 13U.O and
I3§§ZJ, and therefore between 13Z? and 14D.
Or $A lies in the same
interval among the multiples of B in which 5 C lies among the multiples of D.
And so for any multiple of A, C less than \aoA, 100C.
There remains the second question relating to the infinite character of the
definition; four magnitudes A, B, C, D are not to be called proportional
until it is shown that every multiple of A falls in the same intervals among
the multiples of B in which the same multiple of C is found among the
multiples of D. Suppose that the distribution of the railings among the

