columns should be found to agree in the model and the original as far as
the millionth railing. This proves only that the railing distance of the model
does not err by the millionth part of the corresponding column distance. We
can thus fix limits to the disproportion, if any, and we may make those limits
as small as we please, by carrying on the method of observation; but we
cannot observe an infinite number of cases and so enable ourselves to affirm
proportion absolutely. Mathematical methods however enable us to avoid
the difficulty.
We can take any multiples whatever and work with them as if
they were particular multiples. De Morgan gives, as an instance to show that
the definition of proportion can in practice be used, notwithstanding its
infinite character, the following proof of a proposition to the same effect as
Eucl. VI. 2.

B<

—

j

a)

0

\

"3 A

2

8

at

Aj

"Let OAB be a triangle to one side AB of which ab is drawn parallel, and
on OA produced set off AA , A,A etc. equal to OA, and aa , a,/i etc. equal
to Oi.
Through every one of the points so obtained draw parallels to AB,
meeting OB produced in b B etc.
Then it is easily proved that bb , bj> etc. are severally equal to Ob, and
BB
B,B, etc. to OB.
Consequently a distribution of the multiples of OA among the multiples
of Oa is made on one line, and of OB among those of Ob on the other.
T h e examination of this distribution in all its extent (which is impossible,
and hence the apparent difficulty of using the definition) is rendered
unnecessary by the known property of parallel lines. For, since A, lies
between a and a , B, must lie between b and b,; for, if not, the line A B,
would cut either a^ or aj> .
Hence, without inquiring where A does fall, we know that, if it fall
between a and a „ , B must fall between b„ and £
; or, if m. OA fall in
magnitude between n.Oa and (n+ i)Oa, then m.OB
must fall between
n. Ob and (n + i)Ob."
t

u

3

a

3

2

t

3

iy

3

t

a

t

t

m

n

+ 1

m

n + 1

Max Simon remarks (Euclid und die sechs planimetrischen Biicher, p. n o ) ,
after Zeuthen, that Euclid's definition of equal ratios is word for word the
same as Weierstrass' definition of equal numbers. So far from agreeing in
the usual view that the Greeks saw in the irrational no number, Simon thinks
it is clear from Eucl. v. that they possessed a notion of number in all its
generality as clearly defined as, nay almost identical with, Weierstrass' con­
ception of it.
Certain it is that there is an exact correspondence, almost coincidence,
between Euclid's definition of equal ratios and the modern theory of irrationals
due to Dedekind. Premising the ordinal arrangement of natural numbers in
ascending order, then enlarging the sphere of numbers by including
(i) negative numbers as well as positive, (2) fractions, as ajb, where a, b may

