1

Therefore, by Euclid's definition, ay' = bx ;
so that
Thus the groups are again coextensive.
In a word, Euclid's definition divides all rational numbers into two
coextensive classes, and therefore defines equal ratios in a manner exactly
corresponding to Dedekind's theory.
Alternatives

for E u c l . V . D e f . 5.

Saccheri records in his Euclides ob omni naevo vindicatus that a distinguished
geometer of his acquaintance proposed to substitute for Euclid's the following
definition:
" A first magnitude has to a second the same ratio that a third has to a
fourth when the first contains the aliquot parts of the second, according to any
number [i.e. with any denominator] whatever, the same number of times as
the number of times the third contains the same aliquot parts of the fourth ";
on which Saccheri remarks that he sees no advantage in this definition, which
presupposes the notion of division, over that of Euclid which uses multiplication
and the notions of greater, equal, and less.
This definition was, however, practically adopted by Faifofer (Elementi di
geometria, 3 ed., 1882) in the following form :
" F o u r magnitudes taken in a certain order form a proportion when, by
measuring the first and the third respectively by any equi-submultiples
whatever of the second and of the fourth, equal quotients are obtained."
Ingrami (Elementi di geometria, 1904) takes multiples of the first and third
instead of submultiples of the second and fourth :
" Given four magnitudes in predetermined order, the first two homogeneous
with one another, and likewise also the last two, the magnitudes are said to
form a proportion (or to be in proportion) when any multiple of the first
contains the second the same number of times that the equimultiple of the
third contains the fourth."
Veronese's definition (Elementi di geometria, Pt. n., 1905) is like that of
Faifofer; Enriques and Amaldi (Elementi di geometria, 1905) adhere to
Euclid's.
P r o p o r t i o n a l s o f V I I . D e f . 20 a p a r t i c u l a r c a s e .
It has already been observed that Euclid has nowhere proved (though the
fact cannot have escaped him) that the proportion of numbers is included in
the proportion of magnitudes as a special case. This is proved by Simson as
being necessary to the 5th and 6th propositions of Book x . Simson's proof is
contained in his propositions C and D inserted in the text of Book v. and in
the notes thereon. Proposition C and the note on it prove that, if four
magnitudes are proportionals according to vn. Def. 20, they are also proportionals
according to v. Def. 5. Prop. D and the note prove the partial converse,
namely that, if four magnitudes are proportionals according to the 5th definition
of Book v., and if the first be any multiple, or any part, or parts, of the second,
the third is the same multiple, part, or parts, of the fourth. The proofs use
certain results obtained in Book v.
Prop. C is as follows :
If the first be the same multiple of the second, or the same pari of it, that the
third is of the fourth, the first is to the second as the third to the fourth.

