[V. DEP. 7
extensive, will enable an observer of the construction and its model (the
illustration by means of columns and railings described above) to affirm
proportion or deny disproportion, and all it enables us to do is to fix limits
(as small as we please) to the disproportion (if any), a single instance may
enable us to deny proportion or affirm disproportion, and also to state which
way the disproportion lies. Let the 19th railing in the original fall beyond
the n t h column, while the 19th railing of the (so-called) model does not
come up to the n t h column. It follows from this one instance that the
railing distance of the model is too small relatively to the column distance, or
that the column distance is too great relatively to the railing distance. That
is, the ratio of r to c is less than that of R to C, or the ratio of c to r is greater
than that of C to R.
Saccheri (op. cit.) remarks (as Commandinus had done) that the ratio of
the first magnitude to the second will also be greater than that of the third to
the fourth if, while the multiple of the first is equal to the multiple of the
second, the multiple of the third is less than that of the fourth: a case not
mentioned in Euclid's definition.
Saccheri speaks of this case being included
in Clavius' interpretation of the definition.
I have, however, failed to find a
reference to the case in Clavius, though he adds, as a sort of corollary, in his
note on the definition, that if, on the other hand, the multiple of the first is
less than the multiple of the second, while the multiple of the third is riot less
than that of the fourth, the ratio of the first to the second is less than that of
the third to the fourth.
Euclid presumably left out the second possible criterion for a greater ratio,
and the definition of a less ratio, because he was anxious to reduce the
definitions to the minimum necessary for his purpose, and to leave the rest to
be inferred as soon as the development of the propositions of Book v. enabled
this to be done without difficulty.
Saccheri tried to reduce the second possible criterion for a greater ratio to
that given by Euclid in his definition without recourse to anything coming
later in the Book, but, in order to do this, he has to use "multiples" produced
by multipliers which are not integral numbers, but integral numbers plus proper
fractions, so that Euclid's Def. 7 becomes inapplicable.
De Morgan notes that "proof should be given that the same pair of
magnitudes can never offer both tests [i.e. the test in the definition for a
greater ratio and the corresponding test for a less ratio, with "less" substituted
for "greater" in the definition] to another pair; that is, the test of greater
ratio from one set of multiples, and that of less ratio from another." In other
words, if m, n, p, q are integers and A, B, C, D four magnitudes, none of the
pairs of equations
( 1 ) mA>nB,
mC=ox<nD,
(2) mA = nB,
mC < nD
can be satisfied simultaneously with any one of the pairs of equations
(3)

pA = qB,

pC>qD,

(4) pA < qB,
pC>or
= q£>.
There is no difficulty in proving this with the help of two simple
assumptions which are indeed obvious.
W e need only take in illustration one of the numerous cases. Suppose, if
possible, that the following pairs of equations are simultaneously true:
(1) mA>nB,
mC<nD
and
(2) pA<qB,
pC>qD.

