BOOK V

[v. DEFF. 9, IO

DEFINITIONS 9, 10.
9. 'Orav Si rpia uty($y dvdXoyov §> TO irpmrov irpos TO tpvrov StirXaaiova
Xoyov *X*i-v XcycTat r)Vcp irpos TO Stvrtpov.
10. 'Orav Si riaaapa fiiyiOr) dvdXoyov fl, TO irpcorov irp09 TO Ttraprov
rpmXaaiova Xoyov cxctv XcycTat rjircp rrpos TO Scurcpor, icai act cfrjs OfMuat, in?
aV 7/ aVaXoyt'a VTrdpxrj.
Here, and in connexion with the definitions of duplicate, triplicate, etc.
ratios, would be the place to expect a definition of "compound ratio." None
such is however forthcoming, and the only " definition " of it that we find is
that forming vi. Def. 5, which is an interpolation made, perhaps, even before
Theon's time. According to the interpolated definition, " A ratio is said to
be compounded of ratios when the sizes (7r»?A«o'TTrrcs) of the ratios multiplied
together make some (? ratio)." But the multiplication of the sizes (or
magnitudes) of two ratios of incommensurable, and even of commensurable,
magnitudes is an operation unknown to the classical Greek geometers.
Eutocius (Archimedes, ed. Heiberg, ill. p. n o ) is driven to explain the
definition by making TTTJXIKO'TTIS mean the number from which the given ratio
is called, or, in other words, the number which multiplied into the consequent
of the ratio gives the antecedent. But he is only able to work out his idea with
reference to ratios between numbers, or between commensurable magnitudes;
and indeed the definition is quite out of place in Euclid's theory of
proportion.
There is then only one statement in Euclid's text as we have it indicating
what is meant by compound ratio; this is in vi: 23, where he says abruptly
"But the ratio of A"to Mis compounded of the ratio of Kto Z and that of
Z to M." Simson accordingly gives a definition (A of Book v.) of compound
ratio directly suggested by the statement in VI. 23 just quoted.
" When there are any number of magnitudes of the same kind, the first
is said to have to the last of them the ratio compounded of the ratio which
the first has to the second, and of the ratio which the second has to the third,
and of the ratio which the third has to the fourth, and so on unto the last
magnitude.
For example, if A, B, C, D be four magnitudes of the same kind, the
first A is said to have to the last D the ratio compounded of the ratio of
A to B, and of the ratio of B to C, and of the ratio of C to D; or the ratio
of A to D is said to be compounded of the ratios of A to B, B to C, and
C to D.
And if A has to B the same ratio which E has to F; and B to C the
same ratio that G has to ff; and C to D the same that K has to Z ; then,
by this definition, A is said to have to D the ratio compounded of ratios
which are the same with the ratios of E to F, G to ff, and K to Z : and the
same thing is to be understood when it is more briefly expressed, by saying,
A has to D the ratio compounded of the ratios of E to F, G to ff, and
K to L.
In like manner, the same things being supposed, if M has to N the
same ratio which A has to D; then, for shortness' sake, M is said to have to
N the ratio compounded of the ratios of E to F, G to ff, and K to Z."
De Morgan has some admirable remarks on compound ratio, which
not only give a very clear view of what is meant by it but at the same time

