supply a plausible explanation of the origin of the term. "Treat ratio," says
De Morgan, "as an engine of operation. Let that of A to B suggest the
power of altering any magnitude in that ratio." (It is true that it is not yet
proved that, B being any magnitude, and P and Q two magnitudes of the
same kind, there does exist a magnitude A which is to B in the same ratio
as P \a Q. It is not till vi. 12 that this is proved, by construction, in the
particular case where the three magnitudes are straight lines. T h e proof in the
Greek text of v. 18 which assumes the truth of the more general proposition
is, by reason of that assumption, open to objection; see the note on that
proposition.) Now "every alteration of a magnitude is alteration in some
ratio, two or more successive alterations are jointly equivalent to but one, and
the ratio of the initial magnitude to the terminal one is as properly said to be
the compound ratio of alteration as 13 to be the compound addend in* lieu of
8 and 5, or 28 the compound multiple for 7 and 4. Composition is used
here, as elsewhere, for the process of detecting one single alteration which
produces the joint effect of two or more.
T h e composition of the ratios of
P to R, R to S, T to U, is performed by assuming A, altering it in the first
ratio into B, altering B in the second ratio into C, and C in the third ratio
into D. The joint effect turns A into D, and the ratio of A to D is the
compounded ratio."
Another word for compounded ratio is o-wri/ap.o'os (o-vvdtrrm) which is
common in Archimedes and later writers.
It is clear that duplicate ratio, triplicate ratio etc. defined in v. Deff. 9
and 10 are merely particular cases of compound ratio, being in fact the
ratios compounded of two, three etc. equal ratios. The use which the Greek
geometers made of compounded, duplicate, triplicate ratios etc. is well
illustrated by the discovery of Hippocrates that the problem of the duplication
of the cube (or, more generally, the construction of a cube which shall be to
a given cube in any given ratio) reduces to that of finding "two mean
proportionals in continued proportion." This amounted to seeing that, if
x, y are two mean proportionals in continued proportion between any two
lines a, b, in other words, if a is to x as x to y, and x is to y as y to b, then a
cube with side a is to a cube with side x as a is to b; and this is equivalent
to saying that a has to b the triplicate ratio of a to x.
Euclid is careful to use the forms oWXao-iaiv, Tpurkatriuiv,
etc. to express what
we translate as duplicate, triplicate etc. ratios; the Greek mathematicians,
however, commonly used <5tTrXdo-ios Xoyos, "double ratio," TpiirXdo-ios Xoyo?,
"triple ratio" etc. in the sense of the ratios of 2 to 1, 3 to 1 etc. T h e effort,
if such it was, to keep the one form for the one signification and the other for
the other was only partially successful, as there are several instances of the
contrary use, e.g. in Archimedes, Nicomachus and Pappus.
The expression for having the ratio which is " duplicate (triplicate) of that
which it has to the second" is curious—Smkaa-iova (rpnrkao-iova) \6yov l\uv
fjirip irpbs TO htinpov—rjirtp being used as if oWXao-iopa or rpiwkao-tova were a
sort of comparative, in the same way as it is used after /X«'£OK<I or i\a<ro-ova.
Another way of expressing the same thing is to say Xdyot oWXao-tW (rpiirXao-tW)
TOU, of «x"-" 'he ratio "duplicate of that (ratio) which..." T h e explanation
of both constructions would seem to be that St-rrkdo-ioi or SiTrXao-iW is, as
Hultsch translates it in his edition of Pappus (cf. p. 59, 17), duplo maior,
where the ablative duplo implies not a difference but a proportion.
The four magnitudes in Def. 10 must of course be in continued proportion
(xara TO o-w«x«')- The Greek text as it stands does not state this.

