DEFINITION II.
'Op.6\oya ntyidr) XeytTOl Tci piv yyovptva TOIS r/yov/tiVoK TO Si iirop.tva TOIS
(WoftfVcMfi
It is difficult to express the meaning of the Greek in as few words. A
translation more literal, but conveying less, would be, "Antecedents are called
corresponding magnitudes to antecedents, and consequents to consequents."
I have preferred to translate 6//.o'Xoyos by " corresponding " rather than by
"homologous." I do not agree with Max Simon when he says (Euclid, p. i n )
that the technical term "homologous" is not the adjective o/«>Xoyos, and does
not mean "corresponding," "agreeing," but "like in respect of the proportion"
("ahnlich in Bezug auf das Verhaltniss"). T h e definition seems to me to be
for the purpose of appropriating to a technical use precisely the ordinary
adjective 6/*o'Xoyos, "agreeing" or "corresponding."
Antecedents, yyovp.tva, are literally " leading (terms)," and consequents,
cirducco, "following (terms)."

DEFINITION 1 2 .
"EvaXXaf Xoyos tort Xyipis TOV rqyovfiivov irpos TO yyovftcvov KaX TOV iirofUvov
irpos TO iir6p.tvov.
We now come to a number of expressions for the transformation of ratios
or proportions. The first is iva\\d£,
alternately, which would be better
described with reference to a proportion of four terms than with reference to
a ratio. But probably Euclid defined all the terms in Deff. 1 2 — 1 6 with
reference to ratios because to define them with reference to proportions would
look like assuming what ought to be proved, namely the legitimacy of the
various transformations of proportions (cf. v. 16, 7 Por., 1 8 , 1 7 , 19 Por.). The
word eVaXXdf is of course a common term which has no exclusive reference to
mathematics. But this same use of it with reference to proportions already
occurs in Aristotle: Anal. post. 1. 5, 74 a 18, KM. TO dfdXoyov Sri tVaXXdf,
"and that a proportion (is true) alternately, or alternando." Used with Xoyos,
as here, the adverb «WXXd£ has the sense of an adjective, "alternate"; we
have already had it similarly used of " alternate angles " (at cVaXXaf yutvlai) in
the theory of parallels.

DEFINITION 13.
KvdtraXw Xoyos cor! Xr/^is TOV ewofiivov tils yyovfiivov trpbs TO ijyovfxtvov a>s
cird/icvov.
'Avd-raXiv, " inversely," " the other way about," is also a general term with
no exclusive reference to mathematics. For this use of it with reference to
proportion cf. Aristotle, De Caelo 1. 6, 273 b 32 rrjv dvakoyiav rjv TO pd.pt) fy",
oi xpovoi dvdiraXiv l^OVAIV, " the proportion which the weights have, the times
will have inversely."
As here used with Xoyos, aWiraXtv is, exceptionally,
adjectival.

DEFINITION 14.
Svc^co'is Xdyou tori kijipK TOV rjyou/ici/ou /terd TOU c7ro/xcVov O!S ivbs Jrpos avro
TO IWOFIFVOV.

T h e composition of a ratio is to be distinguished from the compounding of
ratios and compounded ratio (o-vy«i/i«i'os Xo'yos) as explained above in the note

