136

BOOK V

[v. DEFF. 1 7 , 18

DEFINITION 1 7 .
At* tO"ou Xoyos cart irXeidviov OKTOIV ueyeflcoV ko.1 aXXoip avrots to-toy TO nXijBos
crvVSvo Xa/t/JWo/tO'toi' Kat CK TcS avTto Xdyto, OTav fl cos iv TOIS Trptiirois fi(y(6t(rt TO
TTptoTOv jrpos TO co-^aTov, OUTCOS iv TOIS 8«VTCpots p.cycfifo-1 TO irptoroi' irpos TOfoxaToi'•
rj dXXcos • Ar/tyis TC5V axprnv *a6' vrrcfatpco-tv Toil' /liatov.
8t' to-ov, <?.* aequali, must apparently mean
aequali distantia, at an equal
distance or interval, i.e. after an equal number of intervening terms. The
wording of the definition suggests that it is rather a proportion ex aequali
than a ratio ex aequali which is being defined (cf. Def. 12). T h e meaning is
clear enough. If a, b, c, d... be one set of magnitudes, and A, B, C, D...
another set of magnitudes, such that
a is to b as A is to B,
b is to c as B is to C,
and so on, the last proportion being, e.g.,
k is to /, as K is to L,
then the inference ex aequali is that
a is to / as A is to L.
The fact that this is so, or the truth of the inference from the hypothesis,
is not proved until v. 22. T h e definition is therefore merely verbal; it gives
a convenient name to a certain inference which is of constant application in
mathematics. But ex aequali could not be intelligibly defined except with
reference to two sets of ratios respectively equal.

DEFINITION 18.
TfTapayftivrj 8i dcaXoytd coriV, orav Tptaiv Svnav fiiytOtav Kal dXXtov avrots
taart' r o TTXTJSOS yti'T/rat ais piv
TOIS rrpolrois
rjyoiiitvov irpos trrdp.o'oi',
OVTO>S
r o t s ScvTcpots fi€yi0€tTLv
Trpos firo/xtvov, cos Sf
Tots Trpiorois

iv

iv
ptylotoiv
-qyovptvov

iv

licyidto-iv iwoficvov irpos dXXo TI, OVTOJS iv Tots Sevrtpots dXXo Tt irpos yyov/ifvov.
Though the words 81' to-ov, ex aequali, are not in this definition, it gives a
description of a case in which the inference ex aequali is still true, as will be
hereafter proved in v. 23. A perturbed proportion is an expression for the
case when, there being three magnitudes a, b, c and three others A, B, C,
a is to b as />' is to C,
and

b is to c as A is to B.

Another description of this case is found in Archimedes, "the ratios being
dissimilarly ordered " (aVo/Jottos TtrayfteVtov TCOV Xdytof). T h e full description of
the inference in this case (as proved in v. 23), namely that
a is to c as A is to C,
is ex aequali in perturbed proportion (St* to-ov iv TtTapay/xeVyj dVaXoyta).
Archimedes sometimes omits the 8t' to-ov, first giving the two proportions and
proceeding thus: "therefore, the proportions being dissimilarly ordered, a has
to c the same ratio as A has to C."
The fact that Def. 18 describes a particular case in which the inference
St' to-ov will be proved true seems to have suggested to some one after
Theon's time the interpolation of another definition between 17 and 18 to

