II. DEF. 2]

D E F I N I T I O N S I, 2

measurement of time by shadows thrown by the sun, and that the word
signified the placing of a staff perpendicular to the horizon. This is borne
out by the statement of Proclus that Oenopides of Chios, who first investigated
the problem (Eucl. 1. 12) of drawing a perpendicular from an external point
to a given straight line, called the perpendicular a straight line drawn
"gnomon-wise" (KOTO yviipova). T h e n (2) we find the
term used of a mechanical instrument for drawing right
1
angles, as shown in the figure annexed. This seems to be
the meaning in Theognis 805, where it is said that the
envoy sent to consult the oracle at Delphi should be
" straighter (Wvrtpoi) than the ropvos, the trraBp.i\ and the
gnomon," and all three words evidently denote appliances,
the Topvos being an instrument for drawing a circle
(probably a string stretched between a fixed and a moving point), and the
trradp-q a plumb-line. Next (3) it was natural that the gnomon, owing to its
shape, should become the figure which remained of a square when a smaller
square was cut out of one corner (or the figure, as Aristotle says, which when
added to a square increases its size but does not alter its form). W e have
seen (note on 1. 47, p. 351) that the Pythagoreans used the term in this sense, and
further applied it, by analogy, to the series of odd numbers as having the same
property in relation to square numbers. T h e earliest evidence for this is the
fragment of Philolaus (c. 460 B.C.) already mentioned (see Boeckh, Philolaos
des Pythagoreers Lehren, p. 141) where he says that " number makes all things
knowable and mutually agreeing (iroroyopo OAAOXOK) in the way characteristic of
the gnomon " (KOTO yvwpmnn <piW). A s Boeckh says (p. 144), it would appear
from the fragment that the connexion between the gnomon and the square to
which it is added was regarded as symbolical of union and agreement, and that
Philolaus used the idea to explain the knowledge of things, making the
knowing embrace and grasp the known as the gnomon does the square. Cf.
Scholium n . N o . 11 (Euclid, ed. Heiberg, V o l . v. p. 2*5), which says " I t is
to be noted that the gnomon was discovered by geometers with a view to
brevity, while the name came from its incidental property, namely that from
it the whole is known, whether of the whole area or of the remainder, when it
is either placed round or taken away. In sundials too its sole function is to
make the actual time of day known."
1

The geometrical meaning of the word is extended in the definition of
gnomon given by Euclid, where (4) the gnomon has
the same relation to any parallelogram as it before
had to a square. From the fact that Euclid says
"'let" the figure described "be called a gnomon " we
may infer that he was using the word in the wider
sense for the first time. Later still (5) we find
Heron of Alexandria defining a gnomon in general
as any figure which, when added to any figure
whatever, makes the whole figure similar to that to which it is added. In
this definition of Heron (Def. 58) Hultsch brackets the words which make it
apply to any number as well; b u f T h e o n of Smyrna, who explains that plane,
triangular, square, solid and other kinds of numbers are so called after the
likeness of the areas which they measure, does make the term in its most
general sense apply to numbers. " A l l the successive numbers which [by
being successively added] produce triangles or squares or polygons are called
g n o m o n s " (p. 3 7 , 1 1 — 1 3 , ed. Hiller). T h u s the successive odd numbers added

