together make square numbers; the gnomons in the case of triangular
numbers are the successive numbers I, 2, 3, 4 . . . ; those for pentagonal
numbers are the series 1, 4, 7, 10...(the common difference being3), and so
on. In general, the successive gnomonic numbers tor any polygonal number,
say of n sides, have n — 2 for their common difference (Theon of Smyrna,
P- 34, 13—15)GEOMETRICAL

ALGEBRA.

We have already seen (cf. part of the note on 1. 47 and the above note on
the gnomon) how the Pythagoreans and later Greek mathematicians exhibited
different kinds of numbers as forming different geometrical figures. Thus,
says T h e o n of Smyrna (p. 36, 6 — n ) , "plane numbers, triangular, square
and solid numbers, and the rest, are not so called independently ( x v p u o t ) but
in virtue of their similarity to the areas which they measure; for 4, since it
measures a square area, is called square by adaptation from it, and 6 is called
oblong for the same reason." A "plane number" is similarly described as a
number obtained by multiplying two numbers together, which two numbers
are sometimes spoken of as " sides," sometimes as the " length" and
" breadth " respectively, of the number which is their product.
T h e product of two numbers was thus represented geometrically by the
rectangle contained by the straight lines representing the two numbers
respectively. It only needed the discovery of incommensurable or irrational
straight lines in order to represent geometrically by a rectangle the product of
any two quantities whatever, rational or irrational; and it was possible to ad­
vance from a geometrical arithmetic to a geometrical algebra, which indeed by
Euclid's time (and probably long before) had reached such a stage of develop­
ment that it could solve the same problems as our algebra so far as they do
not involve the manipulation of expressions of a degree higher than the
second. In order to make the geometrical algebra so generally effective, the
theory of proportions was essential. Thus, suppose that x, y, z etc. are
quantities which can be represented by straight lines, while o, fi, y e t a are
coefficients which can be expressed by ratios between straight lines. We can
then by means of Book v i . find a single straight line d such that
ax + fiy + yz + ... = d.
T o solve the simple equation in its general form
ax + a = b,
where a represents any ratio between straight lines also requires recourse to
the sixth Book, though, e.g., if o is § or J or any submultiple of unity, or if a is
2, 4 or any power of 2, we should not require anything beyond Book 1. for
solving the equation.
Similarly the general form of a quadratic equation
requires Book v i . for its geometrical solution, though particular quadratic
equations may be so solved by means of Book i t alone.
Besides enabling us to solve geometrically these particular quadratic
equations, Book Ii, gives the geometrical proofs of a number of algebraical
formulae. T h u s the first ten propositions give the equivalent of the several
identities
1.

a(b + c + d+...)

2.

(a + b)a + (a + b)b = (a + by,

= ab'+ac +

3.

(a + b) a = ab + a ,

4.

(a + b)' = 0* + ?+

3

tab.

ad+..

