BOOK

248

I

[1.4

25

Again, AB coinciding with DE,
the straight line A C will also coincide with DF, because the
angle BAC is equal to the angle EDF;
hence the point C will also coincide with the point F,
because AC is again equal to DF.
30
But B also coincided with E;
hence the base BC will coincide with the base EF.
[For if, when B coincides with E and C with F, the base
BC does not coincide with the base EF, two straight lines
will enclose a space : which is impossible.
35
Therefore the base BC will coincide with
Thus the whole triangle ABC will coincide with the
whole triangle DEF,
and will be equal to it.
40
And the remaining angles will also coincide with the
remaining angles and will be equal to them,
the angle ABC to the angle DEF,
and the angle ACB to the angle DFE.
Therefore etc.
45

Q. E. D.

1—3. It is a fact that Euclid's enunciations not infrequently leave something to be
desired in point of clearness and precision. Here he speaks of the triangles having "the
angle equal to the angle, namely the angle contained by the equal straight lines " ( T V yuviav
rjj yuviq. l/rrjv txv ^l ^ro G>" lauv c&deiwv wtpitx°l t l )i only one of the two angles being
described in the latter expression (in the accusative), and a similar expression in the dative
being left to be understood of the other angle. It is curious too that, after mentioning two
" sides" he speaks of the angles contained by the equal "straight tines," not "sides."
It
may be that he wished to adhere scrupulously, at the outset, to the phraseology of the
definitions, where the angle is the inclination to one another of two lines or straight lines.
Similarly in the enunciation of 1. 5 he speaks of producing the equal " straight lines " as if to
keep strictly to the wording of Postulate 2.
2. respectively. I agree with Mr H. M. Taylor (Euclid, p. ix) that it is best to
abandon the traditional translation of "each to each," which would naturally seem to imply
that all the four magnitudes are equal rather than (as the Greek ixaripa txaHpa does) that
one is equal to one and the other to the other.
3. the base. Here we have the word base used f6r the first time in the Elements.
Proclus explains it (p. 236, 12—15) as meaning (1), when no side of a triangle has been
mentioned before, the side " which is on a level with the sight" (ttjv rpbt tq tytt KcifUvTfv),
and (2), when two sides have already been mentioned, the third side. Proclus thus avoids
the mistake made by some modem editors who explain the term exclusively with reference to
the case where two sides have been mentioned before. That this is an error is proved (1) by
the occurrence of .the term in the enunciations of I. 37 etc. about triangles on the same base
and equal bases, (2) by the application of the same term to the bases of parallelograms in
1. 35 etc. The truth is that the use of the term must have been suggested by the practice of
drawing the particular side horizontally, as it were, and the rest of the figure above it. The
base of a figure was therefore spoken of, primarily, in the same sense as the base of anything
T

v

T

JJ vr v


