
"If, then, we assumed (1) that the angle AC [i.e. A + C] is equal to the
angle BD [i.e. B + Z>] without asserting generally
that the angles of semicircles are equal, and again
(2) that the angle C is equal to the angle D without
making the further assumption that the two angles of
all segments are equal, and if we then inferred, lastly,
that, since the whole angles are equal, and equal
angles are subtracted from them, the angles which
remain, namely E, F, are equal, we should commit
a petitio principii, unless we assumed [generallyj
that, when equals are subtracted from equals, the
remainders are equal.''
T h e language is noteworthy in some respects.
(1) A, B are said to be drawn (j}y/«W) to the centre (of the circle of
which the two equal sides are radii) as if A, B were not the angular points but
the sides or the radii themselves. (There is a parallel for this in Eucl. iv. 4.)
(2) " T h e angle AC" is the angle which is the sum of A and C, and A
means here the angle at A of the isosceles triangle shown in the figure, and
afterwards spoken of by Aristotle as E, while C is the " mixed " angle between
AB and the circumference of the smaller segment cut off by it.
(3) T h e "angle of a semicircle" (i.e. the " a n g l e " between the diameter
and the circumference, at the extremity of the diameter) and the " angle of a
segment" appear in Euclid m . 16 and HI. Def. 7 respectively, obviously as
survivals from earlier text-books.
But the most significant facts to be gathered from the extract are that in
the text-books which preceded Euclid's " mixed " angles played a much more
important part than they d o with Euclid, and, in particular, that at least two
propositions concerning such angles appeared quite at the beginning, namely
the propositions that the (mixed) angles of semicircles are equal and that the two
(mixed) angles of any segment of a circle are equal. T h e wording of the first
of the two propositions is vague, but it does not necessarily mean more than
that the two (mixed) angles in one semicircle are equal, and I know of no
evidence going to show that it asserts that the angle of any one semicircle is
equal to the angle of any other semicircle (of different size). It is quoted in
the same form, "because the angles of semicircles are equal," in the Latin
translation from the Arabic of Heron's Catoptrica, Prop. 9 (Heron, V o l . 11.,
Teubner, p. 334), but it is only inferred that the different radii of one circle
make equal " angles " with the circumference; and in the similar proposition
of the Pseudo-Euclidean Catoptrica (Euclid, V o l . V I I . , p. 294) angles of the
same sort in one circle are said to be equal " because they are (angles) of
a semicircle." Therefore the first of the two propositions may be only a
particular case of the second.
But it is remarkable enough that the second proposition (that the two
"angles of" any segment of a circle are equal) should, in earlier text-books, have
been placed before the theorem of Eucl. 1. 5. W e can hardly suppose it to
have been proved otherwise than by the superposition of the semicircles into
which the circle is divided by the diameter which bisects at right angles the
base of the segment; and no doubt the proof would be closely connected with
that of Thales' other proposition that any diameter of a circle bisects it, which
must also (as Proclus indicates) have been proved by superposing one of the
two parts upon the other.
It is a natural inference from the passage of Aristotle that Euclid's proof of


