254

BOOK

I

i. 5 was his own, and it would thus appear that his innovations as regards
order of propositions and methods of proof began at the very threshold of the
subject.
P r o o f w i t h o u t producing the sides.
In this proof, given by Proclus (pp. 248, 22—249, 19), D and E are taken
on AB, AC, instead of on AB, AC produced, so that AD, AE are equal. T h e
method of proof is of course exactly like Euclid's, but it does not establish the
equality of the angles beyond the base as well.
P a p p u s ' proof.
Proclus (pp. 249, 20—250, 12) says that Pappus proved the theorem in a
still shorter manner without the help of any construction whatever.
T h i s very interesting proof is given as follows :
" L e t ABC be an isosceles triangle, and AB equal to
^
AC
J\
Let us conceive this one triangle as two triangles, and let
/ \
us argue in this way.
/
\
Since AB is equal to A C, and A C to AB,
I
\
the two sides AB, AC axe equal to the two sides AC, AB.
J
\
A n d the angle BA C is equal to the angle CAB, for it is B
C
the same.
Therefore all the corresponding parts (in the triangles) are equal, namely
BC to BC,
the triangle ABC to the triangle ABC (i.e. ACB),
the angle ABC to the angle ACB,
and the angle ACB to the angle ABC,
(for these are the angles subtended by the equal sides AB, A C.
Therefore in isosceles triangles the angles at the base are equal."
T h i s will no doubt be recognised as the foundation of the alternative
proof frequently given by modern editors, though they do not refer to Pappus.
But they state the proof in a different form, the common method being to
suppose the triangle to be taken up, turned over, and placed again upon itself,
after which the same considerations of congruence as those used by Euclid in
1. 4 are used over again. There is the obvious difficulty that it supposes the
triangle to be taken up and at the same time to remain where it is. (Cf.
Dodgson's humorous remark upon this, Euclid and his modern Rivals, p. 47.)
Whatever we may say in justification of the proceeding (e.g. that the triangle
may be supposed to leave a trace), it is really equivalent to assuming the
construction (hypothetical, if you will) of another triangle equal in all respects
to the given triangle; and such an assumption is not in accordance with
Euclid's principles and practice.
It seems to me that the form given to the proof by Pappus himself is by far
the best, for the reasons (1) that it assumes no construction of a second
triangle, real or hypothetical, (2) that it avoids the distinct awkwardness
involved by a proof which, instead of merely quoting and applying the result
of a previous proposition, repeats, with reference to a new set of data, the
process by which that result was established. If it is asked how we are to
realise Pappus' idea of two triangles, surely we may answer that we keep to one
triangle and merely view it in two aspects. If it were a question of helping a
beginner to understand this, we might say that one triangle is the triangle

