looked at in front and that the other triangle is the same triangle looked at
from behind; but even this is not really necessary.
Pappus' proof, of course, does not include the proof of the second part of
the proposition about the angles under the base, and we should still have to
establish this much in the same way as Euclid does.
Purpose of the

second part of the

theorem.

A n interesting question arises as to the reason for Euclid's insertion of the
second part, to which, it will be observed, the converse proposition I. 6 has
nothing corresponding. A s a matter of fact, it is not necessary for any
subsequent demonstration that is to be found in the original text of Euclid,
but only for the interpolated second case of i. 7 ; and it was perhaps not
unnatural that the undoubted genuineness of the second part of 1. 5 convinced
many editors that the second case of 1. 7 must necessarily be Euclid's also.
Proclus' explanation, which must apparently be the right one, is that the
second part of 1. 5 was inserted for the purpose of fore-arming the learner
against a possible objection (JWrao-ts), as it was technically called, which might
be raised to 1. 7 as given in the text, with one case only. T h e objection would,
as we have seen, take the specific ground that, as demonstrated, the theorem
was not conclusive, since it did not cover all possible cases. From this point
of view, the second part of 1. 5 is useful not only for 1. 7 but, according to
Proclus, for 1. 9 also. Simson does not seem to have grasped Proclus'
meaning, for he says : " A n d Proclus acknowledges, that the second part of
Prop, s was added upon account of Prop. 7 but gives a ridiculous reason for
it, 'that it might afford an answer to objections made against the 7th,' as if the
case of the 7th which is left out were, as he expressly makes it, an objection
against the proposition itself."
j.

PROPOSITION

6.

If in a triangle two angles be equal to one another, the
sides which subtend the equal angles will also be equal to one
another.
Let ABC
be a triangle having the angle ABC
the angle
ACB;
I say that the side AB is also equal to the
side AC.
For, if AB is unequal to AC, one of them is
greater.
Let AB
be greater; and from AB
the
greater let DB be cut off equal to AC the less ;

equal to

let DC be joined.
Then, since DB is equal to A C,
and BC is common,
the two sides DB,
CB respectively;

BC

are equal to the two sides

AC,

