BOOK

I

[i. 6

and the angle DBC is equal to the angle A CB ;
therefore the base DC is equal to the base AB,
and the triangle DBC will be equal to the triangle A
the less to the greater:
which is absurd.
Therefore AB

is not unequal to

CB,

AC;

it is therefore equal to it.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.
Euclid assumes that, because D is between A and B, the triangle DBC
is less than the triangle ABC.
Some postulate is necessary to justify this
tacit assumption; considering an angle less than two right angles, say the
angle ACB in the figure of the proposition, as a cluster of rays issuing from
C and bounded by the rays CA, CB, and joining AB (where A, B are any
two points on CA, CB respectively), we see that to each successive ray taken
in the direction from CA to CB there corresponds one point on AB in which
the said ray intersects AB, and that all the points on AB taken in order from
A to B correspond univocally to all the rays taken in order from CA to
CB, each point namely to the ray intersecting AB in the point.
W e have here used, for the first time in the Elements, the method of
reductio ad absurdum, as to which I would refer to the section above (pp. 136,
140) dealing with this among other technical terms.
T h i s proposition also, being the converse of the preceding proposition,
brings us to the subject of
Geometrical Conversion.
This must of course be distinguished from the logical conversion of a
proposition. T h u s , from the proposition that all isosceles triangles have the
angles opposite to the equal sides equal, logical conversion would only enable
us to conclude that some triangles with two angles equal are isosceles. Thus
1. 6 is the geometrical, but not the logical, converse of 1. 5. On the other
hand, as D e Morgan points out (Companion to the Almanac, 1849, p. 7), 1. 6 is
a purely logical deduction from 1. 5 and 1. 18 taken together, as is 1. 19 also.
For the general argument see the note on 1. 19. For the present proposition
it is enough to state the matter thus. Let X denote the class of triangles
which have the two sides other than the base equal, Y the class of triangles
which have the base angles e q u a l ; then we may call non-X the class of
triangles having the sides other than the base unequal, non- Y the class of
triangles having the base angles unequal.
T h u s we have
All X is Y,
[1. 5]
All non-X is n o n - K ;
[1. 18]
and it is a purely logical deduction that
A l l Y is X
[1. 6]
According to Proclus (p. 252, 5 sqq.) two forms of geometrical conversion
were distinguished.
(1) T h e leading form (7rpoi;you/n«nj). the conversion par excellence (y Kvputn

