
avrurrptxpri), is the complete or simple conversion in which the hypothesis
and the conclusion of a theorem change places exactly, the conclusion of the
theorem being the hypothesis of the converse theorem, which again establishes,
as its conclusion, the hypothesis of the original theorem. T h e relation between
the first part of I. 5 and I. 6 is of this character. In the former the hypothesis
is that two sides of a triangle are equal and the conclusion is that the angles
at the base are equal, while the converse (1. 6) starts from the hypothesis that
two angles are equal and proves that the sides subtending them are equal.
(2) T h e other form of conversion, which we may call partial, is seen
in cases where a theorem starts from two or more hypotheses combined into
one enunciation and leads to a certain conclusion, after which the converse
theorem takes this conclusion in substitution for one of the hypotheses of
the original theorem and from the said conclusion along with the rest of the
original hypotheses obtains, as its conclusion, the omitted hypothesis of the
original theorem. 1. 8 is in this sense a converse proposition to 1. 4 ; for 1. 4
takes as hypotheses ( 1 ) that two sides in two triangles are respectively equal,
(2) that the included angles are equal, and proves (3) that the bases are equal,
while 1. 8 takes (1) and (3) as hypotheses and proves (2) as its conclusion. It
is clear that a conversion of the leading type must be unique, while there
may be many partial conversions of a theorem according to the number of
hypotheses from which it starts.
Further, of convertible theorems, those which took as their hypothesis
the genus and proved a property were distinguished as the leading theorems
(irparfYov/uva), while those which started from the property as hypothesis
and described, as the conclusion, the genus possessing that property were the
converse theorems. 1. 5 is thus the leading theorem and 1. 6 its converse,
since the genus is in this case taken to be the isosceles triangle.
Converse of second part of I. 5.
Why, asks Proclus, did not Euclid convert the second part of 1. 5 as well ?
H e suggests, properly enough, two reasons: ( 1 ) that the second part of 1. 5
itself is not wanted for any proof occurring in the original text, but is only put
in to enable objections to the existing form of later propositions to be met,
whereas the converse is not even wanted for this purpose; (2) that the converse
could be deduced from 1. 6, if wanted, at any time after we have passed 1. 13,
which can be used to prove that, if the angles formed by producing two sides
of a triangle beyond the base are equal, the base angles themselves are equal.
Proclus adds a proof of the converse of the second part of 1. 5, i.e. of the
proposition that, if the angles formed by producing two
sides of_ a triangle beyond the base are equal, the triangle
is isosceles; but it runs to some length and then only
effects a reduction to the theorem of 1. 6 as we have it.
As the result of this should hardly be assumed, a better
proof would be an independent one adapting Euclid's
own method in 1. 6. Thus, with the construction of 1. 5,
we first prove by means of 1. 4 that the triangles BFC,
CGB are equal in all respects, and therefore that FC is
equal to GB, and the angle BFC equal to the angle CGB.
Then we have to prove that AF, AG are equal. If they
are not, let AF be the greater, and from FA cut off FH equal to GA.
Join CH.


