258

BOOK

I

ti. 6 , 7

T h e n we have, in the two triangles HFC, AGB,
two sides HF, FC equal to two sides A G, GB
and the angle HFC equal to the angle AGB.
Therefore (i. 4) the triangles HFC, AGB are equal. But the triangles
BFC, CGB are also equal.
Therefore (if we take away these equals respectively) the triangles HBC,
ACB are equal: which is impossible.
Therefore AF, AG are not unequal.
Hence AF is equal to AG and, if we subtract the equals BF, CG respec­
tively, AB is equal to A C.
This proof is found in the commentary of an-Nairizi (ed. Besthorn-Heiberg,
p. 6 1 ; ed. Curtze, p . 50).
A l t e r n a t i v e proofs of I . 6.
Todhunter points out that 1. 6, not being wanted till 11. 4, could be
postponed till later and proved by means of 1. 26. Bisect the angle BAC
by a straight line meeting the base at D. T h e n the triangles ABD, ACD
are equal in all respects.
Another method depending on 1. 26 is given by an-Nairizi after that
proposition.
Measure equal lengths BD, CE along the sides BA, CA.
Join BE, CD.
T h e n [1. 4] the triangles DBC, ECB are equal in all
respects;
therefore EB, DC are equal, and the angles BEC, CDB
are equal.
T h e supplements of the latter angles are equal [1. 13],
and hence the triangles ABE, ACD have two angles equal respectively and
the side BE equal to the side CD.
Therefore [1. 26] AB is equal to AC.

PROPOSITION 

7.

Given two straight lines constructed on a straight line
{from its extremities) and meeting in a point, there cannot be
constructed on the same straight line {from its extremities'),
and on the same side of it, two other straight lines meeting in
5 another point and equal to the former two respectively, namely
each to that which has the same extremity with it.
For, if possible, given two straight lines AC,
structed on the straight line AB and meeting
at the point C, let two other straight lines
10 AD, DB be constructed on the same straight
line AB, on the same side of it, meeting in
another point D and equal to the former two
respectively, namely each to that which has
the same extremity with it, so that CA is
15 equal to DA

which has the same extremity A

CB

con­

with it, and


