I.

7, 8]

P R O P O S I T I O N S 7. 8

261

I have already referred (note on 1. 1) to the mistake made by those
editors who regard 1. 7 as being of no use except to prove 1. 8. What 1. 7
proves is that if, in addition to the base of a triangle, the length of the side
terminating at each extremity of the base is given, only one triangle satisfying
these conditions can be constructed on one and the same side of the given
base. Hence not only does 1. 7 enable us to prove 1. 8, but it supplements
1. 1 and 1. 22 by showing that the constructions of those propositions give one
triangle only on one and the same side of the base. But for 1. 7 this could
not be proved except by anticipating III, 10, of which therefore 1. 7 is the
equivalent for Book 1. purposes. Dodgson (Euclid and his modern Rivals,
pp. 194—5) puts it in another way. " I t [1. 7] shows that, of all'plane figures
that can be made by hingeing rods together, the three-sided ones (and these
only) are rigid (which is another way of stating the fact that there cannot be
two such figures on the same base). This is analogous to the fact, in relation
to solids contained by plane surfaces hinged together, that any such solid is
rigid, there being no maximum number of sides. A n d there is a close analogy
between 1. 7, 8 and 111. 23, 24. These analogies give to geometry much of its
beauty, and I think that they ought not to be lost sight of." It will therefore
be apparent how ill-advised are those editors who eliminate 1. 7 altogether and
rely on Philo's proof for 1. 8.
Proclus, it may be added, gives (pp. 268, 19—269, 10) another explanation
of the retention of 1. 7, notwithstanding that it was apparently only required
for 1. 8. It was said that astronomers used it to prove that three successive
eclipses could not occur at equal intervals of time, i.e. that the third could not
follow the second at the same interval as the second followed the first; and it
was argued that Euclid had an eye to this astronomical application of the
proposition. But, as we have seen, there are other grounds for retaining the
proposition which are quite sufficient of themselves.
PROPOSITION

8.

If two triangles have the two sides equal to two sides
respectively, and have also the base equal to the base, they will
also have the angles equal which are contained by the equal
straight lines.
5

Let ABC, DEF be two triangles having the two sides
AC equal to the two sides
DF
respectively, namely
AB to DE, and AC to DF; and
let them have the base BC equal
10 to the base EF;
I say that the angle BAC is
also equal to the angle EDF.
For, if the triangle ABC be
applied to the triangle DEF, and if the point B be placed on
15 the point E and the straight line BC on EF,
the point C will also coincide with F,
because BC is equal to EF.
AB,
DE,

