BOOK

262

Then, BC coinciding with
BA,

AC

[1. 8

I

EF,

will also coincide with ED,

DF;

20 for, if the base BC coincides with the base EF,
BA,

AC

do not coincide with ED,

DF

and the sides

but fall beside them

as EG, GF,
then, given two straight lines constructed on a straight
line (from its extremities) and meeting in a point, there will
25 have been constructed on the same straight line (from its
extremities), and on the same side of it, two other straight
lines meeting in another point and equal to the former
two respectively, namely each to that which has the same
extremity with i t
30

But they cannot be so constructed.

[1.7]

Therefore it is not possible that, if the base BC be applied
to the base EF,

the sides BA,

AC

should not coincide with

ED, DF;
they will therefore coincide,
35 so that the angle BAC
EDF,

will also coincide with the angle

and will be equal to it.

If therefore etc.
19.
B A , A C . T h e t e x t h a s h e r e " BA,
CA."
11.
fall b e s i d e t h e m .
T h e G r e e k h a s t h e future, rapa\\d(omn.
" t o pass b y w i t h o u t t o u c h i n g , " " t o m i s s " o r " t o deviate."

Q. E. D.

rapaKKdrra

means

A s pointed out above (p. 257) 1. 8 is a partial converse of 1. 4.
It is to be observed that in 1. 8 Euclid is satisfied with proving the equality
of the vertical angles and does not, as in 1. 4, add that the triangles are equal,
and the remaining angles are equal respectively. T h e reason is no doubt (as
pointed out by Proclus and by Savile after him) that, when once the vertical
angles are proved equal, the rest follows from 1. 4, and there is no object in
proving again what has been proved already.
Aristotle has an allusion to the theorem of this proposition in Meteorologica
in. 3, 373 a 5 — 1 6 . H e is speaking of the rainbow and observes that, if equal
rays be reflected from one and the same point to one and the same point, the
points at which reflection takes place are on the circumference of a circle.
" F o r let the broken lines ACB, AFB, ADB be all reflected from the point
A to the point B (in such a way that) AC, AF, AD are all equal to one
another, and the lines (terminating) at B, i.e. CB, FB, DB, are likewise all
e q u a l ; and let AEB be joined. It follows that the triangles are equal; for
they are upon the equal (base) AEB."
Heiberg (Mathematisches zu Aristoteles, p. 18) thinks that the form of the
conclusion quoted is an indication that in the corresponding proposition to
Eucl. 1. 8, as it lay before Aristotle, it was maintained that the triangles were
equal, and not only the angles, and " w e see here therefore, in a clear example,
how the stones of the ancient fabric were recut for the rigid structure of his

