Elements." I do not, however, think that this inference from Aristotle's
language as to the form of the pre-Euclidean proposition is safe. T h u s if we,
nowadays, were arguing from the data in the passage o f Aristotle, we should
doubtless infer directly that the triangles are equal in all respects, quoting 1. 8
alone. Besides, Aristotle's language is rather careless, as the next sentences
of the same passage show. " Let perpendiculars,"
he says, " be drawn to AEB from the angles, CE
from C, EE from Fa.nd DE from D. These, then,
are equal; for they are all in equal triangles, and
in one p l a n e ; for all of them are perpendicular
to AEB, and they meet at one point E. There­
fore the (line) drawn (through C, F, D) will be a
circle, and its centre (will be) E." Aristotle should
obviously have proved that the three perpendiculars will meet at one point E
on AEB before he spoke of drawing the perpendiculars CE, EE, DE.
This o f course follows from their being " i n equal triangles" (by means of
Eucl. 1. 26); and then, from the fact that the perpendiculars meet at one
point on AB, it can be inferred that all three are in one plane.
Philo's proof of I . 8.
This alternative proof avoids the use of I. 7, and it is elegant; but it is
inconvenient in one respect, since three cases have to be distinguished.
Proclus gives the proof in the following order (pp. 266, 15—268, 14).
Let ABC, DEF be two triangles having the sides AB, A C equal to the
sides DE, DF respectively, and the base BC equal to the base EF.
Let the triangle ABC be applied to the triangle DEF, so that B is placed
on E and BC on EF, but so that A falls on the opposite side of EFhom
D,
taking the position G. T h e n C will coincide with F, since BC is equal to
EF.
Now EG will either be in a straight line with DF, or make an angle with
it, and in the latter case the angle will either be interior (Kara TO IVTOS) to the
figure or exterior (KOTO, TO IKT6%).
I.

Let EG be in a straight line with

A

DF.
Then, since DE is equal to EG, and
DFG is a straight line,
DEG is an isosceles triangle, and the
angle at D is equal to the angle at G.
Si­
l l . L e t DF, FG form an angle interior to the figure.
Let DG be joined.
Then, since DE, EG are equal,
the angle EDG is equal to the angle
EGD.
Again, since DF is equal to FG,
the angle FDG is equal to the angle
FGD.
Therefore, by addition,
the whole angle EDF is equal to the
whole angle EGF.

•

