substantially from Euclid's. In the first case, where ADE is the. equilateral
triangle constructed on DE, take any point Fon AD, and from AE cut oft"
A G equal to AF. Join DG, EF meeting in H; and
join AH.
Then AH is the bisector required.
Proclus also answers the possible objection that
might be raised to Euclid's proof on the ground that
it assumes that, if the equilateral triangle be described
on the side of DE opposite to A, its vertex .Fwill lie
within the angle BAC.
T h e objector is supposed to
argue that this is not necessary, but that F might fall
either on one of the lines forming the angle or outside
it altogether. T h e two cases are disposed of thus.
Suppose F to fall as shown in the two figures below respectively.
Then, since ED is equal to EE,
the angle FDE is equal to the angle FED.
Therefore the angle CED is greater than the angle FDE;
and, in the
second figure, a fortiori, the angle CED is greater than the angle BDE.
But, since ADE is an isosceles triangle, and the equal sides are produced,

the angles under the base are equal,
i.e., the angle CED is equal to the angle BDE.
But the angle CED was proved greater : which is impossible.
Here then is the second case in which, in Proclus' view, the second part
of i. 5 is useful for refuting objections.
On this proposition Proclus takes occasion (p. 271, 15 — 1 9 ) to emphasize
the fact that the given angle must be rectilineal, since the bisection of any sort
of angle (including angles made by curves with one another or with straight
lines) is not matter for an elementary treatise, besides which it is questionable
whether such bisection is always possible.
" T h u s it is difficult to say
whether it is possible to bisect the so-called horn-like angle " (formed by the
circumference of a circle and a tangent to it).
Trisection of an a n g l e .
Further it is here that Proclus gives us his valuable historical note about
the trisection of any acute angle, which (as well as the division of an angle in
any given ratio) requires resort to other curves than circles, i.e. curves of the
species which, after Geminus, he calls " m i x e d . " " T h i s , " he says (p. 272,
1—12), "is shown by those who have set themselves the task of trisecting such
a given rectilineal angle. For Nicomedes trisected any rectilineal angle by
means of the conchoidal lines, the origin, order, and properties of which he
has handed down to us, being himself the discoverer of their peculiarity.
Others have done the same thing by means of the quadratrices of Hippias
and Nicomedes, thereby again using ' m i x e d ' curves. But others, starting
from the Archimedean spirals, cut a given rectilineal angle in a given ratio."

