(a) Trisection by means of the conchoid.
I have already spoken of the conchoid of Nicomedes (note on Def. 2,
pp. 1 6 0 — 1 ) ; it remains to show how it could be used for trisecting an
angle. Pappus explains this (iv. pp. 274—5) as follows.
Let ABC be the given acute angle, and from any point A in AB draw
A C perpendicular to BC.

B

C

Complete the parallelogram FBCA and produce FA to a point E such
that, if BE be joined, BE intercepts between AC and AE a length DE equal
to twice AB.
I say that the angle EBC is one-third of the angle ABC.
For, joining A to G, the middle point of DE, we have the three straight
lines AG, DG, EG equal, and the angle AGD is double of the angle A ED
or EBC.
But DE is double of AB;
therefore AG, which is equal to DG, is equal to AB.
H e n c e the angle A GD is equal to the angle ABG.
Therefore the angle ABD is also double of the angle EBC;
so that the angle EBC is one-third of the angle ABC.
So far Pappus, who reduces the construction to the drawing of BE so
that DE shall be equal to twice AB.
T h i s is what the conchoid constructed with B&s pole, A C&& directrix, and
distance equal to twice AB enables us to d o ; for that conchoid cuts AE in
the required point E.
(b) U s e of the quadratrix.
T h e plural quadratrices in the above passage is a Hellenism for the
singular quadratrix, which was a curve discovered by Hippias of Elis about
420 B.C. According t o Proclus (p. 356, 1 1 ) Hippias proved its properties;
and we are told ( 1 ) in the passage quoted above that Nicomedes also
investigated it and that it was used for trisecting an angle, and (2) by Pappus
(iv. pp. 250, 33—252, 4) that it was used by Dinostratus and Nicomedes and
some more recent writers for squaring the circle, whence its name. It is
described thus (Pappus iv. p. 252).
Suppose that ABCD is a square and BED a quadrant of a circle with
centre A.
Suppose ( 1 ) that a radius of the circle moves P
C
uniformly about A from the position AB to the
^
position AD, and (2) that in the same time the
\ ^ / N.
line BC moves uniformly, always parallel to itself,
FV
\
and with its extremity B moving along BA, from
/
\
the position BC to the position AD.
0 / K —^jf
\
T h e n the radius AE and the moving line BC
/ y
\
\
determine at any instant by their intersection a
/yS
\
'
point F.
i<f
I\
T h e locus of F\s the quadratrix.
«
H MQ
0

