Apollonius, we are told (Proclus, pp. 279, 16
— 280, 4), bisected a straight
line AB by a construction like that of I, 1.
With centres A, B, and radii AB, BA respec­
tively, two circles are described, intersecting in
C, D. Joining CD, AC, CB, AD, DB, Apol­
lonius proves in two steps that CD bisects AB.
(1) Since, in the triangles ACD, BCD,
two sides AC, CD are equal to two sides
BC, CD,
and the bases AD, BD are equal,
the angle ACD is equal to the angle
BCD.
| L 8J
(2) T h e latter angles being equal, and AC being equal to CB, while CE
is common,
the equality of AE, EB follows by 1. 4.
T h e objection to this proof is that, instead of assuming the bisection of
the angle ACB, as already effected by 1. 9, Apollonius goes a step further
back and embodies a construction for bisecting the angle. That is, he
unnecessarily does over again what has been done before, which is open to
objection from a theoretical point of view.
Proclus (pp. 277, 25—279, 4) warns us against being moved by this
proposition to conclude that geometers assumed, as a preliminary hypothesis,
that a line is not made up of indivisible parts (i( i/ifpoiv).
This might be
argued thus. I f a line is made up of indivisibles, there must be in a finite
line either an odd or an even number of them. If the number were odd,
it would be necessary in order to bisect the line to bisect an indivisible (the
odd one). In that case therefore it would not be possible to bisect a straight
line, if it is a magnitude made up of indivisibles. But, if it is not so made
up, the straight line can be divided ad infinitum or without limit (br awtipov
SicupeiTtu).
Hence it was argued (<pao-iV), says Proclus, that the divisibility
of magnitudes without limit was admitted and assumed as a geometrical
principle. T o this he replies, following Geminus, that geometers did indeed
assume, by way of a common notion, that a continuous magnitude, i.e. a
magnitude consisting of parts connected together (o-mriiiiiivuiv), is divisible
(ouHpeTdV).
But infinite divisibility was not assumed by t h e m ; it was proved
by means of the first principles applicable to the case.
" F o r when," he
says, " t h e y prove that the incommensurable exists among magnitudes, and
that it is not all things that are commensurable with one another, what
else will any one say that they prove but that every magnitude can be
divided for ever, and that we shall never arrive at the' indivisible, that
is, the least common measure of the magnitudes? This then is matter of
demonstration, whereas it is an axiom that everything continuous is divisible,
so that a finite continuous line is divisible. T h e writer of the Elements
bisects a finite straight line, starting from the latter notion, and not from any
assumption that it is divisible without limit." Proclus adds that the proposition
may also serve to refute Xenocrates' theory of indivisible lines (<ITO/MH ypafi/uu).
T h e argument given by Proclus to disprove the existence of indivisible lines
is substantially that used by Aristotle as regards magnitudes generally (cf.
Physics v i . 1, 231 a 21 sqq. and especially v i . 2, 233 b 15—32).

