BOOK

I

[ i . I I , 12

worth noting, though I doubt the advantage of rearranging the propositions
in consequence.
Apollonius gave a construction for this proposition (see Proclus, p. 282, 8)
differing from Euclid's in much the same way as his construction for bisecting
a straight line differed from that of 1. 10. Instead of assuming an equilateral
triangle drawn without repeating the process of 1. 1, Apollonius takes D and
E equidistant from C as in Euclid, and then draws circles in the manner of

1. 1 meeting at F. This necessitates proving again that DF is equal to EE;
whereas Euclid's assumption of the construction of 1. 1 in the words " let the
equilateral triangle FDE be constructed " enables him to dispense with the
drawing of circles and with the proof that DF is equal to FE at the same
time. While however the substitution of Apollonius' constructions for 1. 10
and 11 would show faulty arrangement in a theoretical treatise like Euclid's,
they are entirely suitable for what we call practical geometry, and such may
have been Apollonius' object in these constructions and in his alternative for
i. 23.
Proclus gives a construction for drawing a straight line at right angles to
another straight line but from one end of it, instead of from an intermediate
point on it, it being supposed (for the sake of argument) that we are not
permitted to produce the straight line. In the commentary of an-Nairizi (ed.
Besthorn-Heiberg, pp. 7 3 — 4 ; ed. Curtze, pp. 54—5) this construction is
attributed to Heron.
Let it be required to draw from A a straight line at right angles to AB.
On AB take any point C, and in the manner of the proposition draw CE
at right angles to AB.
.From CE cut off CD equal to AC, bisect the
angle ACE by the straight line CF,
[1. 9]
and draw DF at right angles to CE meeting CF
in F. Join FA.
T h e n the angle FA C will be a right angle.
For, since, in the triangles ACF, DCF, the
two sides AC, CF are equal to the two sides
DC, CF respectively, and the included angles
ACF, DCF site equal,
the triangles are equal in all respects.
[1. 4 ]
Therefore the angle at A is equal to the" angle at D, and is accordingly a
right angle.
PROPOSITION

12.

To a given infinite straight line, from a given point
•which is not on it, to draw a perpendicular straight line.
Let AB be the given infinite straight line, and C the
given point which is not on it;

