gnomon-wise ( K a r a •yvw/uora), because the gnomon is also at right angles to the
horizon." In this earlier sense the gnomon was a staff placed in a vertical
position for the purpose of casting shadows and so serving as a means of
measuring time (Cantor, Geschichie der Mathematik, i , p. 161). T h e later
meanings of the word as used in Eucl. Book I I . and elsewhere will be
explained in the note on Book II. Def. 2.
Proclus says that two kinds of perpendicular were distinguished, the "plane"
(ORVCOOS) and the " solid" ( o r t p t a ) , the former being the perpendicular
dropped on a line in a plane and the latter the perpendicular dropped on a
plane. T h e term "solid perpendicular" is sufficiently curious, but it may
perhaps be compared with the Greek term " solid locus " applied to a conic
section, apparently on the ground that it has its origin in the section of a
solid, namely a cone.
Attention is called by most editors to the assumption in this proposition
that, if only D be taken on the side of AB remote from C, the circle described
with CD as radius must necessarily cut AB in two points. T o satisfy us of
this we need, as in I. 1, some postulate of continuity, e.g. something like that
suggested by Killing (see note on the Principle of Continuity above, p. 235):
" If a point [here the point describing the circle] moves in a figure which is
divided into two parts [by the straight line], and if it belongs at the beginning
of the motion to one part and at another stage of the motion to the other
part, it must during the motion cut the boundary between the two parts," and
this of course applies to the motion in two directions from D.
But the editors have not, as a rule, noticed a possible objection to the
Euclidean statement of this problem which is much more difficult to dispose
of at this stage, i.e. without employing any proposition later than this in
Euclid's order. H o w do we know, says the supposed critic, that the circle
does not cut AB in three or more points, in which case there would be not
one perpendicular but three or more? Proclus (pp. 286, 12—289, 6) tries to
refute this objection, and it is interesting to follow his argument, though it
will easily be seen to be inconclusive. H e takes in order three possible
suppositions.
3

1. May not the circle meet AB in a third point K between the middle
point of GE and either extremity of it, taking the form drawn in the figure
appended ?
Suppose this possible. Bisect GE in H. Join CH, and produce it to
meet the circle in Z . Join CG, CK, CE.
Then, since CG is equal to CE, and
CH is common, while the base GH is
equal to the base HE,
the angles CHG, CHE are equal and,
since they are adjacent, they are both right.
Again, since C G is equal to CE,
the angles at G and E are equal.
Lastly, since CK is equal to CG and
also to CE, the angles CGK, CKG are
equal, as also are the angles CKE, CEK.
Since the angles CGK, CEK are equal, it follows that
the angles CKG, CKE are equal and therefore both right.
Therefore the angle CKH is equal to the angle CHK,
and CH is equal to CK.

