
But CK is equal to CL, by the definition of the circle; therefore CH is
equal to CL : which is impossible.
Thus Proclus; but why should not the circle meet AB in Has well as Kt
2. May not the circle meet AB in H the middle point of GE and take
the form shown in the second figure ?
In that case, says Proclus, join CG, CH, CE as before. T h e n bisect HE
at K, join CK and produce it to meet
the circumference at L.
Now, since HK is equal to KE, CK
is common, and the base CH is equal to
the base CE,
the angles at K are equal and therefore
both right angles.
Therefore the angle CHK is equal to
the angle CKH, whence CK is equal to CH
and therefore to CL: which is impossible.
So Proclus; but why should not the circle meet AB in K as well as H?
3. May not the circle meet AB in two points besides G, E and pass,
between those two points, to the side of AB towards C, as in the next figure ?
Here again, by the same method, Proclus proves that, K, L being the
other two points in which the circle cuts
AB,
CK is equal to CH,
and, since the circle cuts CH in M,
CM is equal to CK and therefore to
CH: which is impossible.
But, again, why should the circle not
cut AB in the point H as well?
In fact, Proclus' cases are not mutually
exclusive, and his method of proof only enables us to show that, if the circle
meets AB in one more point besides G, E, it must meet it in more points
still. W e can always find a new point of intersection by bisecting the distance
separating any two points of intersection, and so, applying the method ad
infinitum, we should have to conclude ultimately that the circle with radius
CH (or CG) coincides with AB.
It would follow that a circle with centre
C and radius greater than CH would not meet AB at all. Also, since all
straight lines from C to points on AB would be equal in length, there would
be an infinite number of perpendiculars from C on AB.
Is this under any circumstances possible ? It is not possible in Euclidean
space, but it is possible, under the Riemann hypothesis (where a straight line
is a " closed series " and returns on itself), in the case where C is the pole of
the straight line AB.
It is natural therefore that, for a proof that in Euclidean space there is
only one perpendicular from a point to a straight line, we have to wait until
1. 16, the precise proposition which under the Riemann hypothesis is only valid
with a certain restriction and not universally. There is no difficulty involved
by waiting until 1. 16, since I. 12 is not used before that proposition is reached;
and we are only in the same position as when, in order to satisfy ourselves of
the number of possible solutions of 1. 1, we have to wait till 1. 7.
But if we wish, after all, to prove the truth of the assumption without
recourse to any later proposition than I. 12, we can do so by means of this
same invaluable 1. 7.


