If the circle intersects AB as before in G, E, let H be the middle point of
GE, and suppose, if possible, that the
circle also intersects AB in any other point
KonAH.
From H, on the side of AB opposite to
C, draw HL at right angles to AB, and
H
\
make HL equal to HC.
A GV V
E
B
Join CG, LG, CK, LK.
Now, in the triangles CHG,
LHG,
CH is equal to LH, and HG is common.
Also the angles CHG, LHG, being
both right, are equal.
Therefore the base CG is equal to the base LG.
Similarly we prove that CK is equal to LK.
But, by hypothesis, since K is on the circle,
CK is equal to CG.
Therefore CG, CK, LG, LK are all equal.
Now the next proposition, I. 13, will tell us that CH, HL are in a straight
line; but we will not assume this. Join CL.
Then on the same base CL and on the same side of it we have two pairs
of straight lines drawn from C, L to G and K such that CG is equal to CK
and LG to LK.
But this is impossible [1. 7].
Therefore the circle cannot cut BA or BA produced in any point other
than G on that side of CL on which G is.
Similarly it cannot cut AB or AB produced at any point other than E
on the other side of CL.
T h e only possibility le/t therefore is that the circle might cut AB in the
same point as that in which CL cuts it. But this is shown to be impossible
by an adaptation of the proof of 1. 7.
For the assumption is that there may be some point M on CL such thai
CM is equal to CG and LM to LG.
If possible, let this be the case, and produce CG
\oN.
Then, since CM is equal to CG,
the angle NGM is equal to the angle GML [1. 5, part 2].
Therefore the angle GML is greater than the angle
MGL.
Again, since LG is equal to LM,
the angle GML is equal to the angle MGL.
But it was also greater : which is impossible.
Hence the circle in the original figure cannot cut AB in the point in
which CL cuts it.
Therefore the circle cannot cut AB in any point whatever except G and E.
[This proof of course does not prove that CK is less than CG, but only
that it is not equal to it.
T h e proposition that, of the obliques drawn
from C to AB, that is less the foot of which is nearer to H can only be proved
later. T h e proof by 1. 7 also fails, under the Riemann hypothesis, if C, L are
the poles of the straight line AB, since the broken lines CGL, CKL etc.
become equal straight lines, all perpendicular to AB.]
Proclus rightly adds (p. 289, 18 sqq.) that it is not necessary to take D on
the side of AB away from A if an objector " says that there is no space on

