I.

16, 1 7 ]

PROPOSITIONS

1 6 , 17

281

For, if possible, let AB, AC, AD be all equal, B, C, D being in a
straight line.
Then, since AB, AC are equal, the angles
ABC, ACB are equal.
Similarly, since AB, AD are equal, the angles
ABD, ADB are equal.
Therefore the angle ACB is equal to the angle
ADC, i.e. the exterior angle to the interior and
opposite angle: which is impossible.
Proclus next (p. 308, 14 sqq.) undertakes to prove by means of 1. 16 that,
if a straight line falling on two straight lines make the exterior angle equal to
the interior and opposite angle, the two straight lines will not form a triangle or
meet, for in that case the same angle would be both greater and equal.
T h e proof is really equivalent to that of Eucl. 1. 27. If BE falls on the
two straight lines AB, CD in such a way that the angle
CDE is equal to the interior and opposite angle ABD,
AB and CD cannot form a triangle or meet. For, if
they did, then (by 1. 16) the angle CDE would be
greater than the angle ABD, while by the hypothesis
it is at the same time equal to it.
Hence, says Proclus, in order that BA, DC may
form a triangle it is necessary for them to approach one B
another in the sense of being turned round one pair of
corresponding extremities, e.g. B, D, so that the other extremities A, C come
nearer. This may be brought about in one of three w a y s : (1) AB may
remain fixed and CD be turned about D so that the angle CDE increases;
(2) CD may remain fixed and AB be turned about B so that the angle ABD
bj^omes smaller; (3) b o t h ^ i ? and CD may move so as to make the angle
ABD smaller and the angle CDE larger at the same time. T h e reason, then,
of the straight lines AB, CD coming to form a triangle or to meet is (says
Proclus) the movement of the straight lines.
Though he does not mention it here, Proclus does in another passage
(p. 3 7 1 , 2—10, quoted on p. 207 above) hint at the possibility that, while 1. 16
may remain universally true, either of the straight lines BA, DC (or both
together) may be turned through any angle not greater than a certain finite
angle and yet may not meet (the Bolyai-Lobachewsky hypothesis).

PROPOSITION

17.

In any triangle two angles taken together in any manner
are less than two right angles.
Let ABC be a triangle ;
I say that two angles of the triangle ABC
any manner are less than two right angles.
For let BC

be produced to D.

taken together in
[Post. 2]

Then, since the angle ACD is an exterior angle of the
triangle ABC,
it is greater than the interior and opposite angle ABC.

