282

BOOK

I

[i. 17

Let the angle ACB be added to each ;
therefore the angles A CD, A CB are greater than the angles

ABC,

BCA.

\

^ s .

\

^ \

But the angles A CD, A CB are equal to two right angles.
[I;

'3]

Therefore the angles ABC, BCA are less than two right
angles.
Similarly we can prove that the angles BAC,
ACB
are
also less than two right angles, and so are the angles
CAB,
ABC as well.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.
1. t a k e n
together.

together

in

any

m a n n e r , i r d r r g /wraXa/4p\u'6/iej'ai, i . e .

any

pair

added

A s in his note on the previous proposition, Proclus tries to state the cause
of the property. H e takes the case of two straight lines forming right angles
with a transversal and observes that it is the convergence of the straight lines
towards one another (o-tntvent T<3V ciOtwv), the lessening of the two right angles,
which produces the triangle. H e will not have it that the fact of the exterior
angle being greater than the interior and opposite angle is the cause of the
property, for the odd reason that " i t is not necessary that a side should be
produced, or that there should be any exterior angle constructed.. .and how can
what is not necessary be the cause of what is necessary?" (p. 3 1 1 , 1 7 — 2 1 ) .
Agreeably to this view, Proclus then sets himself to prove the theorem
without producing a side of the triangle.
L e t ABC be a triangle.
T a k e any point D on
BC, and join AD.
T h e n the exterior angle ADC of the triangle ABD
is greater than the interior and opposite angle ABD.
Similarly the exterior angle ADB of the triangle
ADC is greater than the interior and opposite angle
ACD.
Therefore, by addition, the angles ADB, ADC are together greater than
the angles ABC,
ACB.
B u t the angles ADB, ADC are equal to two right angles; therefore the
angles ABC, ACB are less than two right angles.
Lastly, Proclus proves (what is obvious from this proposition) that there
cannot be more than one perpendicular to a straight line from a point without
it. For, if this were possible, two of such perpendiculars would form a triangle
in which two angles would be right angles: which is impossible, since any two
angles of a triangle are together less than two right angles.

