T o apply this to the case before us, let us denote the sides of the triangle
ABC by a, b, c, and the angles opposite to these sides by A, B, C respectively,
and suppose that a is the base.
Then we have the three propositions,
when b is equal to c, B is equal to C,
[1. 5]
when b is greater than c, B is greater than C, \
[1 i$\
when b is less than c, B is less than C,
J
and it follows logically that,
when B is equal to C, b is equal to c,
[1. 6]
when B is greater than C, b is greater than c,
}
ft
'9]
when B is less than C, b is less than c.
Reductio ad absurdum b y e x h a u s t i o n .
Here, says Proclus (p. 318, 16—23), Euclid proves the impossibility " b y
means of division" ( « 8taip«r«at). T h i s means simply the separation of
different hypotheses, each of which is inconsistent with the truth of the
theorem to be proved, and which therefore must be successively shown to be
impossible. If a straight line is not greater than a straight line, it must be
either equal to it or l e s s ; thus in a reductio ad absurdum intended to prove
such a theorem as 1. 19 it is necessary to dispose successively of two hypotheses
inconsistent with the truth of the theorem.
A l t e r n a t i v e (direct) proof.
Proclus gives a direct proof (pp. 3 1 9 — 3 2 1 ) which an-Nairizi also has and
attributes to Heron. It requires a lemma and is consequently open to the
slight objection of separating a theorem from its converse. B u t the lemma
and proof are worth giving.
Lemma.
If an angle of a triangle be bisected and the straight line bisecting it meet the
base and divide it into unequal parts, the sides containing the angle will be
unequal, and the greater will be that which meets the greater segment of the base,
and the less that which meets the less.
Let AD, the bisector of the angle A of the triangle ABC, meet BC in D,
making CD greater than BD.
I say that A C is greater than AB.
Produce AD to E so that DE is equal to
AD.
And, since DC is greater than BD, cut
off DF equal to BD.
Join EFanA produce it to G.
Then, since the two sides AD, DB are
equal to the two sides ED, DF, and the
vertical angles at D are equal,
AB is equal to EF,
and the angle DEF to the angle BAD,
i.e. to the angle DAG (by hypothesis).
Therefore AG is equal to EG,
and therefore greater than EF, or AB.
Hence, a fortiori, AC is greater than AB.

