I. 20]

PROPOSITIONS

19, 20

287

But

is equal to
AC;
therefore BA, AC are greater than BC.
Similarly we can prove that AB,
BC are also greater
than CA, and BC, CA than
AB.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.
It was the habit of the Epicureans, says Proclus (p. 322), to ridicule this
theorem as being evident even to an ass and requiring no proof, and their
allegation that the theorem was " k n o w n " (yvmpifiov) even to an ass was based
on the fact that, if fodder is placed at one angular point and the ass at another,
he does not, in order to get to his food, traverse the two sides of the triangle
but only the one side separating them (an argument which makes Savile exclaim
that its authors were " d i g n i ipsi, qui cum Asino foenum essent," p. 78).
Proclus replies truly that a mere perception of the truth of the theorem is a
different thing from a scientific proof of it and a knowledge of the reason why
it is true. Moreover, as Simson says, the number of axioms should not be
increased without necessity.
A l t e r n a t i v e Proofs.
Heron and Porphyry, we are told (Proclus, pp. 323—6), proved this
theorem in different ways as follows, without producing one of the sides.
First proof.
Let ABC be the triangle, and let it be required to prove that the sides
BA, AC axe greater than BC.
Bisect the angle BAC by AD meeting BC in D.
Then, in the triangle ABD,
the exterior angle ADC is greater than the
interior and opposite angle BAD,
[1. 16]
that is, greater than the angle DAC.
Therefore the side AC is greater than the side
CD.
[1. 19]
Similarly we can prove that AB is greater than BD.
Hence, by addition, BA, AC axe greater than BC.
Second proof
This, like the first proof, is direct. There are several cases to be considered.
(1) If the triangle is equilateral, the truth of the proposition is obvious.
(2) If the triangle is isosceles, the proposition needs no proof in the case
(a) where each of the equal sides is greater than the base.
(b) If the base is greater than either of the other sides, we have to prove
that the sum of the two equal sides is greater than
the base. Let BC be the base in such a triangle.
Cut off from BC a length BD equal to AB, and
join AD.
Then, in the triangle ADB, the exterior angle
ADC is greater than the interior and opposite angle
BAD.
[1. 16]
Similarly, in the triangle ADC, the exterior angle ADB is greater than the
interior and opposite angle CAD.

