B y addition, the two angles BDA, ADC are together greater than the
two angles BAD, DAC (or the whole angle BAC).
Subtracting the equal angles BDA, BAD, we have the angle ADC
greater than the angle CAD.
It follows that AC is greater than CD;
[i. 19]
and, adding the equals AB, BD respectively, we have BA, AC together
greater than BC.
(3) I f the triangle be scalene, we can arrange the sides in order of length.
Suppose BC is the greatest, AB the intermediate and AC the least side.
T h e n it is obvious that AB, BC are together greater than AC, and BC, CA
together greater than AB.
It only remains therefore to prove that CA, AB are together greater
than BC.
We cut off from BC a length BD equal to the adjacent side, join AD, and
proceed exactly as in the above case of the isosceles triangle.
Third proof.
This proof is by reductio ad absurdum.
Suppose that BC is the greatest side and, as before, we have to prove that
BA, AC axe greater than BC.
If they are not, they must be either equal to
or less than BC.
A

(1) Suppose BA, AC are together equal
to BC.
From BC cut off BD equal to BA, and
join AD.
It follows from the hypothesis that DC is equal to AC.
T h e n , since BA is equal to BD,
the angle BDA is equal to the angle BAD.
Similarly, since A C is equal to CD,
the angle CD A is equal to the angle CAD.
By addition, the angles BDA, ADC are together equal to the whole angle
BAC.
T h a t is, the angle BAC is equal to two right angles : which is impossible.
(2) Suppose BA, AC are together less than BC.
From BC cut off BD equal to BA, and from CB cut off CE equal to
CA. Join AD, AE.
In this case, we prove in the same way that
the angle BDA is equal to the angle BAD, and
the angle CEA to the angle CAE.
By addition, the sum of the angles BDA,
AEC is equal to the sum of the angles BAD,
CAE.
Now, by 1. 16, the angle BDA is greater than the angle DAC, and
therefore, a fortiori, greater than the angle EAC.
Similarly the angle AEC is greater than the angle BAD.
H e n c e the sum of the angles BDA, AEC is greater than the sum of the
angles BAD, EAC.
But the former sum was also equal to the latter: which is impossible.

