BOOK

290

I

[1. 21

T h e editors generally call attention to the fact that the lines drawn within
the triangle in this proposition must be drawn,
as the enunciation says, from the ends of the
side; otherwise it is not necessary that their
sum should be less than that of the remaining
sides of the triangle. Proclus (p. 327, 12 sqq.)
gives a simple illustration.
Let ABC be a right-angled triangle. T a k e
any point D on BC, join DA, and cut off
from it DE equal to AB.
Bisect AE at E,
and join EC.
T h e n shall CF, FD be together greater than CA, AB.
For CF, EE are equal to CF, FA,
and therefore greater than CA.
A d d the equals ED, AB respectively;
therefore CF, FD are together greater than CA, AB.
Pappus gives the same proposition as that just proved, but follows it up
by a number of others more elaborate in character, selected apparently from
" t h e so-called paradoxes" of one Erycinus (Pappus, III. p. 106 sqq.). Thus
he proves the following:
1. In any triangle, except an equilateral triangle or an isosceles triangle
with base less than one of the other sides, it is possible to construct on the
base and within the triangle two straight lines the sum of which is equal to
the sum of the other two sides of the triangle.
2. In any triangle in which it is possible to construct two straight lines on
the base which are equal to the sum of the other two sides of the triangle it is
also possible to construct two others the sum of which \s greater than that sum.
3. Under the same conditions, if the base is greater than either of the
other two sides, two straight lines can be constructed in the manner described
which are respectively greater than the other two sides of the triangle; and the
lines may be constructed so as to be respectively equal to the two sides, if one
of those two sides is less than the other and each of them less than the base.
4. T h e lines may be so constructed that their sum will bear to the sum
of the two sides of the triangle any ratio less than 2 : 1 .
As a specimen of the proofs we will give that of the proposition which has

A T

been numbered (1) for the case where the triangle is isosceles (Pappus, I I I .
pp. 1 0 8 — n o ) .

