Let ABC be an isosceles triangle in which the base AC is greater than
either of the equal sides AB, BC.
With centre A and radius AB describe a circle meeting A C in D.
Draw any radius AEF such that it meets BC in a point F outside the circle.
Take any point G on EF, and through it draw GH parallel to AC T a k e
any point K on GH, and draw KL parallel to FA meeting A C in Z .
From - S C cut off BN equal to EG.
Thus /4 G, or LK, is equal to the sum of AB, BN, and CN is less than Z A i
Now GF, FHaxe together greater than GH,
and CH, HK together greater than CK.
Therefore, by addition,
CF, FG, HK are together greater than CK, HG.
Subtracting HK from each side, we see that
CF, FG are together greater than CK, KG;
therefore, if we add AG to each,
AF, FCaxe. together greater than AG, GK, KC.
And AB, BC are together greater than AF, FC.
[.. 2 1 ]
Therefore AB, BC are together greater than AG, GK, KC.
But, by construction, AB, BN axe together equal to AG;
therefore, by subtraction, NC is greater than GK, KC,
and a fortiori greater than KC.
Take on KC produced a point M such that KM is equal to NC;
with centre K and radius KM describe a circle meeting CL in 0, and join KO.
T h e n shall LK, KO be equal to AB, BC.
For, by construction, LK is equal to the sum of AB, BN, a n d KO is
equal to NC;
therefore LK, KO are together equal to AB, BC.
It is after I . 21 that (as remarked by D e Morgan) the important
proposition about the perpendicular and obliques drawn from a point to a
straight line of unlimited length is best introduced :
Of all straight lines that can be drawn to a given straight line of unlimited
length from a given point without it:
(a) the perpendicular is the shortest ;
(b) of the obliques, that is the greater the fool of which is further from the
perpendicular;
(c) given one oblique, only one other can be found of the same length, namely
that the foot of which is equally distant with the foot of the given one from the
perpendicular, but on the other side of it.
Let A be the given point, BC the given straight l i n e ; let AD be
the perpendicular from A on BC,
and AE, AF any two obliques of
which AF makes the greater angle
with AD.
Produce AD to A', making A'D
equal to AD, and join A'E, A'F.
Then the triangles ADE, A'DE
are equal in all respects; and so are
the triangles ADE, A'DF.
Now (1) in the triangle AEA' the
two sides AE, EA' are-greater than AA' [1. 20I, that is, twice AE is greater
than twice AD.

