BOOK

'94

[i. 22, »3

I

centre G at the distance GH must meet DG betwixt D and G; and that
these circles must meet one another, because FD and GH are together
greater than FG."
We have in fact only to satisfy ourselves that one of the circles, e.g. that
with centre G, has at least one point of its circumference outside the other
circle and also at least one point of its circumference inside the same circle;
and this is best shown with reference to the points in which the first circle
cuts the straight line DE. For (i) FH, being equal to the sum of B and C,
is greater than A, i.e. than the radius of the circle with centre F, and therefore
H is outside that circle. (2) If GM be measured along GE equal to GH
or C, then, since GM is either (a) less or (b) greater than GF, Mm\l fall
either (a) between G and F or (b) beyond F towards D; in the first case
(a) the sum of EM and C is equal to FG and therefore less than the sum
of A and C, so that EM is less than A or FD; in the second case (b) the
sum o f MF and FG, i.e. the sum of ME and B, is equal to GM or C, and
therefore less than the sum of A and B, so that MF is less than A or FD;
hence in either case M falls within the circle with centre F.
It being now proved that the circumference of the circle with centre G
has at least one point outside, and at least one point inside, the circle with
centre F, we have only to invoke the Principle of Continuity, as we have to
do in 1. 1 (cf. the note on that proposition, p. 242, where the necessary
postulate is stated in the form suggested b y Killing).
T h a t the construction of the proposition gives only two points of
intersection between the circles, and therefore only two triangles satisfying
the condition, one on each side of FG, is clear from 1. 7, which, as before
pointed out, takes the place, in Book 1., of l i t 10 proving that two circles
cannot intersect in more points than two.

PROPOSITION

23.

On a given straight line and at a point on it to construct a
rectilineal angle equal to a given rectilineal angle.
Let AB be the'given straight line, A the point on it, and
the angle DCE the given rectilineal angle;
thus it is required to construct on the given straight line
AB,
and at the point A on it, a rectilineal angle equal to the
given rectilineal angle DCE.

On the straight lines CD, CE
D,

respectively let the points

E be taken at random ;

let DE

be joined,

and out of three straight lines which are equal to the three

