P R O P O S I T I O N S 22, 23

»95

straight lines CD, DE, CE let the triangle AFG be con­
structed in such a way that CD is equal to AF, CE to AG,
and further DE to FG.
[1. 22]
Then, since the two sides DC, CE are equal to the two
sides FA., A G respectively,
and the base DE is equal to the base FG,
the angle DCE is equal to the angle FA G.
[1. 8]
Therefore on the given straight line AB, and at the point
A on it, the rectilineal angle FAG has been constructed equal
to the given rectilineal angle DCE.

Q. E. F.

This problem was, according to Eudemus (see Proclus, p. 333, 5), "rather
the discovery of Oenopides," from which we must apparently infer, not that
Oenopides was the first to find any solution of it, but that it was he who dis­
covered the particular solution given by Euclid. (Cf. Bretschneider, p. 65.)
T h e editors do not seem to have noticed the fact that the construction of
the triangle assumed in this proposition is not exactly the construction given
in 1. 22. W e have here to construct a triangle on a certain finite straight line
AG as base; in 1. 22 we have only to construct a triangle with sides of given
length without any restriction as to how it is to be placed. T h u s in 1. 22 we
set out any line whatever and measure successively three lengths along it
beginning from the given extremity, and what w e must regard as the base is the
intermediate length, not the length beginning at the given extremity, of the
straight line arbitrarily set out. Here the base is a given straight line abutting
at a given p o i n t T h u s the construction has to be modified somewhat from

F

that of the preceding proposition. W e must measure A G along AB so that
AG is equal to CE (or CD), and GH along GB equal to DE; and then we
must produce BA, in the opposite direction, to F, so that AF\s equal to CD
(or CE, if AG has been made equal to CD).
Then, by drawing circles ( 1 ) with centre A and radius AE, (2) with centre
G and radius GH, we determine K, one of their points of intersection, and we
prove that the triangle KAG is equal in all respects to the triangle DCE, and
then that the angle at A is equal to the angle DCE.
I think that Proclus must (though he does not say so) have felt the same
difficulty with regard to the use in 1. 23 of the result of 1. 22, and that this is
probably the reason why he gives over again the construction which I have
given above, with the remark (p. 334, 6) that " y o u may obtain the construction
of the triangle in a more instructive manner (SIOWKOAUCUITCP'OI') as follows."
Proclus objects to the procedure of Apollonius in constructing an angle
under the same conditions, and certainly, if he quotes Apollonius correctly, the
latter's exposition must have been somewhat slipshod.


