296

BOOK

I

z

[1. 23. 4

" H e takes an angle CDE at random," says Proclus (p. 3 3 5 , 1 9 sqq.), "and
a straight line AB, and with centre D and distance
CD describes the circumference CE, and in the same
way with centre A and distance AB the circumference
EB. Then, cutting off EB equal to CE, he joins AF.
A n d he declares that the angles A, D standing on
equal circumferences are equal."
In the first place, as Proclus remarks, it should be
premised that AB is equal to CD in order that the
circles may be equal; and the use of Book 111. for
such an elementary construction is objectionable.
T h e omission to state that AB must be taken equal
to CD was no doubt a slip, if it occurred. A n d , as
regards the equal angles " standing on equal circum­
ferences," it would seem possible that Apollonius said
this in explanation, for the sake of brevity, rather than by way of proof. It
seems to me probable that his construction was only given from the point of
view of practical, not theoretical, geometry. It really comes to the same thing
as Euclid's except that DC is taken equal to DE. For cutting off the arc BF
equal to the arc CE can only be meant in the sense of measuring the chord
CE, say, with a pair of compasses, and then drawing a circle with centre B
and radius equal to the chord CE. Apollonius' direction was therefore
probably intended as a practical short cut, avoiding the actual drawing of the
chords CE, BF, which, as well as a proof of the equality in all respects of the
triangles CDE, BAF, would be required to establish theoretically the correct­
ness of the construction.

PROPOSITION

24.

If two triangles have the two sides equal to two sides
respectively, but have the one of the angles contained by the equal
straight lines greater than the other, they will also have the
base greater than the base.
5

L e t ABC,
DEF
be two triangles having the two sides
AB,
A C equal to the two sides DE, DF respectively, namely
AB to DE, and A C to DF, and let the angle at A be greater
than the angle at D ;
I say that the base BC is also greater than the base EF.
10
For, since the angle
BAC
is greater than the angle EDF,
A
let there be constructed, on the
straight line DE, and at the
point D on it, the angle EDG
15 equal to the angle BAC;
[1. 23]
let DG be made equal to either
rj
of the two straight lines AC,
DF,
and let EG, FG be joined.
D

