298

BOOK

I

[1. 24

two cases, the proof is not complete unless we show that, with his assumption,
/ ' m u s t , in the figure of the proposition, fall below EG.
D e Morgan would make the following proposition precede: Every straight
line drawn from the vertex of a triangle to the base is less than the greater of the
two sides, or than either if they are equal, and he would prove it by means of
the proposition relating to perpendicular and obliques given above, p. 291.
But it is easy to prove directly that E falls below EG, if
DE is not greater than DG, by the method employed by
Pfleiderer, Lardner, and Todhunter.
L e t DF, produced if necessary, meet EG in H.
Then the angle DHG is greater than the angle DEG;
[.. 16]
and the angle DEG is not less than the angle DGE;
[1. 18]
therefore the angle DHG is greater than the angle DGH.
H e n c e DH is less than DG,
[1. 19]
and therefore DH is less than DF.
A l t e r n a t i v e proof.
Lastly, the modern alternative proof is worth giving.

L e t DH bisect the angle FDG (after the triangle DEG has been made
equal in all respects to the triangle ABC, as in the proposition), and let DH
meet EG in H. Join HE.
Then, in the triangles FDH, GDH,
the two sides FD, DHaxe equal to the two sides GD, DH,
and the included angles FDH, GDH axe e q u a l ;
therefore the base HE is equal to the base HG.
Accordingly EG is equal to the sum of EH, HE;
and EH, HE axe together greater than EF;
[1. 20]
therefore EG, or BC, is greater than EF.
Proclus (p. 3 3 9 , 1 1 sqq.) answers by anticipation the possible question that
might occur to any one on this proposition, viz. why does Euclid not compare
the areas of the triangles as he does in 1. 4 ? H e observes that inequality of
the areas does not follow from the inequality of the angles contained by the
equal sides, and that Euclid leaves out all reference to the question both for
this reason and because the areas cannot be compared without the help of the
theory of parallels. " But if," says Proclus, " we must anticipate what is to
come and make our comparison of the areas at once, we assert that (1) if
the angles A, D—supposing that our argument proceeds with reference to the
figure in the proposition—are (together) equal to two right angles, the triangles

