Proclus has the following interesting note (p. 352, 13-—18): " E u d e m u s
in his geometrical history refers this theorem to Thales. For he says that, in
the method by which they say that Thales proved the distance of ships in the
sea, it was necessary to make use 0f this theorem." A s , unfortunately, this
information is not sufficient of itself to enable us to determine how Thales
solved this problem, there is considerable room for conjecture as to his
method.
T h e suggestions of Bretschneider and Cantor agree in the assumption
that the necessary observations were probably made from the top of some
tower or structure of known height, and that a right-angled triangle was used in
which the tower was the perpendicular, and the line connecting the bottom of
the tower and the ship was the base, as in the annexed figure, where AB is the
tower and C the ship. Bretschneider {Die Geometrie und die Geometer vor
Eukleides, § 30) says that it was only necessary for
the observer to observe the angle CAB, and then
A
the triangle would be completely determined by
means of this angle and the known length AB.
A s Bretschneider says that the result would be
obtained " in a m o m e n t " by this method, it is not
clear in what sense he supposes Thales to have
" o b s e r v e d " the angle BAC.
Cantor is more
definite (Gesch. d. Math. i , p. 145), for he says that
the problem was nearly related to that of finding the
Seqt from given sides. By the Seqt in the Papyrus Rhind is meant the
ratio to one another of certain lines in pyramids or obelisks. Eisenlohr and
Cantor took the one word to be equivalent, sometimes to the cosine of the
angle made by the edge of the pyramid with the co-terminous diagonal of the
base, sometimes to the tangent of the angle of slope of the faces of the pyramid.
It is now certain that it meant one thing, viz. the ratio of half the side of
the base to the height of the pyramid, i.e. the cotangent of the angle of
slope. T h e calculation of the Seqt thus implying a sort of theory of simi­
larity, or even of trigonometry, the suggestion of Cantor is apparently that
the Seqt in this case would be found from a small right-angled triangle ADE
having a common angle A with ABC as shown in the figure, and that the
ascertained value of the Seqt with the length AB would determine BC. This
amounts to the use of the property of similar triangles; and Bretschneider's
suggestion must apparently come to the same thing, since, even if Thales
measured the angle in our sense (e.g. by its ratio to a right angle), he would,
in the absence of something correspondingHo a table of trigonometrical ratios,
have gained nothing and would have had to work out the proportions all the
same.
Max C . P . Schmidt also (Kulturhistorische Beitrage zur Kenntnis des
griechischen und rbmischen Altertums, 1906, p. 32) similarly supposes Thales to
have had a right angle made of wood or bronze with the legs graduated, to
have placed it in the position ADE (A being the position of his eye), and
then to have read off the lengths AD, DE respectively, and worked out the
length of BC by the rule of three.
How then does the supposed use of similar triangles and their property
square with Eudemus' remark about 1. 26 ? A s it stands, it asserts the
equality of two triangles which have two angles and one side respectively
equal, and the theorem can only be brought into relation with the above
explanations by taking it as asserting that, if two angles and one side of one
triangle are given, the triangle is completely determined. But, if Thales
D

1

8

