i. 26]

P R O P O S I T I O N 26

3

o

S

practically used proportions, as supposed, 1. 26 is surely not at all the theorem
which this procedure would naturally suggest as underlying it and being
" necessarily u s e d " ; the use of proportions or of similar but not equal
triangles would surely have taken attention altogether away from 1. 26 and
fixed it on vi. 4.
For this reason I think Tannery is on the right road when he tries to find
a solution using 1. 26 as it stands, and withal as primitive as any recorded
solution of such a problem. His suggestion (La Giomitrie grecque, pp. 90—1)
is based on the fluminis varatio of the Roman agrimensor Marcus Junius
Nipsus and is as follows.
T o find the distance from a point A to an inaccessible point B. From A
measure along a straight line at right angles to AB a
length A C and bisect it at D.
From C draw CE at right
angles to CA on the side of it remote from B, and let E
be the point on it which is in a straight line with B and D.
Then, by I. 26, CE is obviously equal to AB.
As regards the equality of angles, it is to be observed
that those at D are equal because they are vertically
opposite, and, curiously enough, Thales is expressly
credited with the discovery of the equality of such angles.
T h e only objection which I can see to Tannery's
solution is that it would require, in the case of the ship, a
certain extent of free and level ground for the construction
and measurements.
I suggest therefore that the following may have been
Thales' method. Assuming that he was on the top of a
tower, he had only to use a rough instrument made of a straight stick and a
cross-piece fastened to it so as to be capable of turning about the fastening
(say a nail) so that it could form any angle with the stick and would remain
where it was put. Then the natural thing would be to fix the stick upright
(by means of a plumb-line) and direct the cross-piece towards the ship.
Next, leaving the cross-piece at the angle so found, the stick could be turned
round, still remaining vertical, until the cross-piece pointed to some visible
object on the shore, when the object could be mentally noted and the distance
from the bottom of the tower to it could be subsequently measured. This
would, by 1. 26, give the distance from the bottom of the tower to the ship.
This solution has the advantage of corresponding better to the simpler and
more probable version of Thales' method of measuring the height of the
pyramids; Diogenes Laertius says namely (1. 27, p. 6, ed. Cobet) on the
authority of Hieronymus of Rhodes (B.C. 290—230), that he waited for this
purpose until the moment when our shadows are of the same length as ourselves.
Recapitulation of congruence t h e o r e m s .
Proclus, like other commentators, gives at this point (p. 347, 20 sqq.) a
summary of the cases in which the equality of two triangles in all respects can
be established. W e may, he says, seek the conditions of such equality by
successively considering as hypotheses the equality (1) of sides alone, (2) of
angles alone, (3) of sides and angles combined. Taking (1) first, we can only
establish the equality of the triangles in all respects if all three sides are
respectively equal; we cannot establish the equality of the triangles by any
hypothesis of class (2), not even the hypothesis that all the three angles are
respectively equal; among the hypotheses of class (3), the equality of one

