side and one angle in each triangle is not enough, the equality (a) of one side
and all three angles is more than enough, as is also the equality (A) of two
sides and two or three angles, and (c) of three sides and one or two angles.
T h e only hypotheses therefore to be examined from this point of view are
the equality of
(o) three sides [Eucl. 1. 8].
(J3) two sides and one angle [1. 4 proves one case of this, where the angle
is that contained by the sides which are by hypothesis equal].
(•y) one side and two angles [1. 26 covers all cases].
It is curious that Proclus makes no allusion to what we call the ambiguous
case, that case namely of (/8) in which it is an angle opposite to one of the
two specified sides in one triangle which is equal to the angle opposite to the
equal side in the other triangle. Camerer indeed attributes to Proclus the
observation that in this case the equality of the triangles cannot, unless some
other condition is added, be asserted generally; but it would appear that
Camerer was probably misled by a figure (Proclus, p. 351) which looks like a
figure of the ambiguous case but is really only used to show that in 1. 26 the
equal sides must be corresponding sides, i.e., they must be either adjacent to the
equal angles in each triangle, or opposite to corresponding equal angles, and
that, e.g., one of the equal sides must not be adjacent to the two angles in
one triangle, while the side equal to it in the other triangle is opposite to one
of the two corresponding angles in that triangle.
T h e ambiguous c a s e .
If two triangles have two sides equal to two sides respectively, and if the
angles opposite to one pair of equal sides be also equal, then will the angles
opposite the other pair of equal sides be either equal or supplementary ; and, in
the former case, the triangles will be equal in all respects.
Let ABC, DEF be two triangles such that AB is equal to DE, and AC
to DF, while the angle ABC is equal to the angle DEF;
it is required to prove that the angles ACB, DFE are either equal or
supplementary.

Now (1), if the angle BAC be equal to the angle EDF, it follows, since
the two sides AB, AC are equal to the two sides DE, DF respectively, that
the triangles ABC, DEF axe equal in all respects,
[1. 4]
and the angles A CB, DFE are equal.
(2) I f the angles BA C, EDF be not equal, make the angle EDG (on
the same side of ED as the angle EDF) equal to the angle BAC.
Let EF, produced if necessary, meet DG in GThen, in the triangles ABC, DEG,
the two angles BAC, ABC are equal to the two angles EDG, DEG
respectively,
and the side AB is equal to the side DE;

