But straight lines which do not meet in either direction
are parallel;
therefore AB

[Def. 23]
is parallel to CD.

Therefore etc.

Q. E. D.

1. falling on two straight lines, eh S6o tvtelat lurlrrovaa, the phrase being the same
as that used in Post. 5, meaning a transversal.
». the alternate angles, ai iva\\a(
yurlai. Proclus (p. 357, 9) explains that Euclid
uses the word alternate (or, more exactly, alternately, lraKha£) in two connexions, (1) of a
certain transformation of a proportion, as in Book V. and the arithmetical Books, (2) as here,
of certain of the angles formed by parallels with a straight line crossing them. Alternate
angles are, according to Euclid as interpreted by Proclus, those which are not on the same
side of the transversal, and are not adjacent, but are separated by the transversal, both being
within the parallels but one "above" and the other "below." The meaning is natural
enough if we imagine the four internal angles to be taken in cyclic order and alternate angles
to be any two of them not successive but separated by one angle of the four.
9. in the direction of B , D or towards A , C, literally "towards the farts B, D or
towards A, C," M TO. B, A /Ufn) :j irl ri A, T.

With this proposition begins the second section of the first Book. U p
to this point Euclid has dealt mainly with triangles, their construction
and their properties in the sense of the relation of their parts, the sides and
angles, to one another, and the comparison of different triangles in respect of
their parts, and of their area in the particular cases where they are congruent.
T h e second section leads up to the third, in which we pass to relations
between the areas of triangles, parallelograms and squares, the special feature
being a new conception of equality of areas, equality not dependent on
congruence. This whole subject requires the use of parallels. Consequently
the second section beginning at 1. 27 establishes the theory of parallels,
introduces the cognate matter of the equality of the sum of the angles of a
triangle to two right angles (1. 32), and ends with two propositions forming the
transition to the third section, namely 1. 33, 34, which introduce the parallelo­
gram for the first time.
Aristotle on parallels.
We have already seen reason to believe that Euclid's personal contribution
to the subject was nothing less than the formulation of the famous Postulate
5 (see the notes on that Postulate and on Def. 23), since Aristotle indicates
that the then current theory o f parallels contained a petitio principii, and
presumably therefore it was Euclid who saw the defect and proposed the
remedy.
But it is clear that the propositions 1. 27, 28 were contained in earlier
text-books. They were familiar to Aristotle, as we may judge from two
interesting passages.
(1) In Anal. Post. I. 5 he is explaining that a scientific demonstration
must not only prove a fact of every individual of a class (KOTO iron-dt) but
must prove it primarily and generally true (rrpurov xaddAov) of the whole of
the class as o n e ; it will not d o to prove it first of one part, then of another
part, and so on, until the class is exhausted. H e illustrates this (74 a 13—16)
by a reference to parallels : " If then one were to show that right (angles) do
not meet, the proof of this might be thought to depend on the fact that this
is true of all (pairs of actual) right angles. But this is not so, inasmuch as
the result does not follow because (the two angles are) equal (to two right


