angles) in the particular way [i.e. because each is a right angle], but by virtue
of their being equal (to two right angles) in any way whatever [i.e. because
the sum only needs to be equal to two right angles, and the angles themselves
may vary as much as we please subject to this]."
(2) T h e second passage has already been quoted in the note on Def. 23 :
" there is nothing surprising in different hypotheses leading to the same false
conclusion; e.g. the conclusion that parallels meet might equally be drawn
from either of the assumptions (a) that the interior (angle) is greater than the
exterior or (b) that the sum of the angles of a triangle is greater than two
right angles" (Anal. Prior. 11. 17, 66 a n — 1 5 ) .
I do not quite concur in the interpretation which Heiberg places upon
these passages (Mathematisches zu Aristoteles, pp. 18—19). H e says, first,
that the allusion to the " interior angle " being " greater than the exterior " in
the second passage shows that the reference in the first passage must be to
Eucl. I. 28 and not to I. 27, and he therefore takes the words 0V1 0JS1 «r<u in
the first passage (which I have translated " because the two angles are equal
to two right angles in the particular way ") as meaning " because the angles,
viz. the exterior and the interior, are equal in the particular way." H e also
takes at 6p8al oi cru/Win-ovo-i (which I have translated " right angles do not
meet," an expression quite in Aristotle's manner) to mean "perpendicular
straight lines do not m e e t " ; this is very awkward, especially as he is obliged
to supply angles with urai in the next sentence.
But I think that the first passage certainly refers to 1. 28, although I d o
not think that the alternative (a) in the second passage suggests it. This
alternative may, I think, equally with the alternative (0) refer to I. 27. T h a t
proposition is proved by reductio ad absurdum based on the fact that, if the
straight lines do meet, they must form a triangle, in which case the exterior
angle must be greater than the interior (while according to the hypothesis
these angles are equal). It is true that Aristotle speaks of the hypothesis
that the interior angle is greater than the exterior; but after all Aristotle had
only to state some incorrect hypothesis. It is of course only in connexion
with straight lines meeting, as the hypothesis in 1. 27 makes them, that the
alternative (b) about the sum of the angles of a triangle could come in, and
alternative (a) implies alternative (*).
It seems clear then from Aristotle that 1. 27, 28 at least are pre-Euclidean,
and that it was only in I. 29 that Euclid made a change by using his Postulate.
D e Morgan observes that I. 27 is a logical equivalent of I. 16. Thus, if A
means "straight lines forming a triangle with a transversal," B "straight lines
making angles with a transversal on the same side which are together less
than two right angles," we have
All A is B,
and it follows logically that
A l l not-2? is ti.oX.-A.

PROPOSITION

28.

If a straight line falling
on two straight lines make the
exterior angle equal to the interior and opposite angle on the
same side, or the interior angles on the same side equal to two
right angles, the straight lines will be parallel to one another.

