And (2) the possible pairs on different sides of the transversal may consist
respectively of
(a) two internal angles, viz. the pairs (AGH, GHD) and (CHG, HGB);
(b) two external angles, viz. the pairs (AGE, DHF) and (EGB, CHE);
(c) one external and one internal, viz. the pairs (AGE, GHD), (EGB,
GHC), (EHC, HGB) aird (FHD, HGA).
T h e angles are equal in the pairs (1) (c), (2) (a) and (2) (b), and the sum
is equal to two right angles in the case of the pairs (1) (a), (1) (b) and (2) ( A
For his criteria Euclid selects the cases (2) (a) [1. 27] and (1) (c), (i)(a) [1. 28],
leaving out the other three, which are of course equivalent but are not quite
so easily expressed.
From Proclus' note on I. 28 (p. 361) we learn that one Aigeias (? Aineias)
of Hierapolis wrote an epitome or abridgment of the Elements. This seems
to be the only mention of this editor and his workj and they are only
mentioned as having combined Eucl. 1. 27, 28 into one proposition. T o do
this, or to make the three hypotheses the subject of three separate theorems,
would, Proclus thinks, have been more natural than to deal with them, as
Euclid does, in two propositions. Proclus has no suggestion for explaining
Euclid's arrangement unless the ground were that 1. 27 deals with angles on
different sides, 1. 28 with angles on one and the same side, of the transversal.
But may not the reason have been one of convenience, namely that the
criterion of 1. 27 is that actually used to prove parallelism, and is moreover
the basis of the construction of parallels in 1. 3 1 , while 1. 28 only reduces the
other two hypotheses to that of 1. 27, so that precision of reference, as well as
clearness of exposition, is better secured by the arrangement adopted ?

PROPOSITION 

29.

A straight
line falling
on parallel
straight
lines
makes
the alternate
angles equal to one another,
the exterior
angle
equal to the interior and opposite angle, and the interior
angles
on the same side equal to two right
angles.
5
For let the straight line EF fall on the parallel straight
lines AB,
CD;
I say that it makes the alternate angles AGH,
GHD
equal, the exterior angle EGB
equal to the interior and
opposite angle GHD, and the interior angles on the same
10 side, namely BGH, GHD, equal to two right angles.
For, if the angle A GH is unequal
to the angle GHD,
one of them is
greater.
Let the angle AGH
be greater.
15
.Let the angle BGH
be added to
each;
therefore the angles AGH,
BGH
are greater than the angles
BGH,
GHD.
p


