
Proof of E u c l i d ' s P o s t u l a t e 5 from '* Playfair's " a x i o m .
Let AB, CD make with the transversal EF the angles AEF,
EEC
together less than two right angles.
T o prove that AB, CD meet towards A, C.
^
B
Through E draw GH making with EFthz angle
Q-J—^«rrrrrrT7.
GEF equal (and alternate) to the angle EFD.
\
Thus GH is parallel to CD.
[1. 27]
\
Then (1) AB must meet CD in one direction or
F
the other.
For, if it does not, AB must be parallel to CD; hence we have two
straight lines AB, GH intersecting at E and both parallel to CD:
which is impossible.
Therefore AB, CD must meet.
(2) Since AB, CD meet, they must form a triangle with EF.
But in any triangle any two angles are together less than two right angles.
Therefore the angles AEF, EEC (which are less than two right angles),
and not the angles BEE, EFD (which are together greater than two right
angles, by 1. 13), are the angles of the triangle;
that is, EA, EC meet in the direction of A, C, or on the side of EF on
which are the angles together less than two right angles.
H

A

c

T h e usual course in modern text-books which use " Playfair's " axiom in
lieu of Euclid's Postulate is apparently to prove 1 29 by means of the axiom,
and then Euclid's Postulate by means of I. 29,
De Morgan would introduce the proof of Postulate 5 by means of
"Playfair's" axiom before 1. 29, and would therefore apparently prove 1. 29 as
Euclid does, without any change.
A s between Euclid's Postulate 5 and " Playfair's" axiom, it would appear
that the. tendency in modern text-books is rather in favour of the latter.
Thus, to take a few noteworthy foreign writers, we find that Rausenberger
stands almost alone in using Euclid's Postulate, while Hilbert, Henrici and
Treutlein, Rouchd and D e Comberousse, Enriques and Amaldi all use
" Playfair's " axiom.
Yet the case for preferring Euclid's Postulate is argued with some force by
Dodgson (Euclid and his modern Rivals, pp. 44—6). H e maintains (1) that
"Playfair's" axiom in fact involves Euclid's Postulate, but at the same time
involves more than the latter, so that, to that extent, it is a needless strain on
the faith of the learner. This is shown as follows.
Given AB, CD making with .E-Fthe angles AEF, EEC together less than
two right angles, draw GH through E so that the angles GEE, EEC are
together equal to two right angles.
Then, by I. 28, GH, CD are " separational."
We see then that any lines which have the property (a) that they make
with a transversal angles less than two right angles have also the property (/8)
that one of them intersects a straight line which is "separational" from
the other.
Now Playfair's axiom asserts that the lines which have property (/?) meet
if produced : for, if they did not, we should have two intersecting straight
lines both " separational" from a third, which is impossible.
We then argue that lines having property (a) meet because lines having
property (a) are lines having property (/}). But we do not know, until we
have proved 1. 29, that all pairs of lines having property (/}) have also property


