For let CE be drawn through the point C parallel to the
straight line AB.
[1. 3']
Then, since AB is parallel to CE,
and A C has fallen upon them,
the alternate angles BA C, A CE
equal to one another.
Again, since AB

are

[1. 29]
is

parallel

to

CE,
and the straight line BD has fallen upon them,
the exterior angle ECD is equal to the interior and opposite
angle ABC.
[1. 29]
But the angle ACE was also proved equal to the angle

BAC;
therefore the whole angle ACD
interior and opposite angles BAC,
Let the angle ACB

is equal to the two

ABC.

be added to each ;

therefore the angles A CD, A CB are equal to the three
angles ABC, BCA,
CAB.
But the angles A CD, A CB are equal to two right angles;

P- '31
therefore the angles ABC,
to two right angles.
Therefore etc.

BCA,

CAB

are also equal

Q. E. D.

This theorem was discovered in the very early stages of Greek geometry.
What we know of the history of it is gathered from three allusions found in
Eutocius, Proclus and Diogenes Laertius respectively.
1. Eutocius at the beginning of his commentary on the Conia of
Apollonius (ed. Heiberg, V o l . 11. p. 170) quotes Geminus as saying that " t h e
ancients (01 <ipx ' ') investigated the theorem of the two right angles in each
individual species of triangle, first in the equilateral, again in the isosceles,
and afterwards in the scalene triangle, and later geometers demonstrated the
general theorem to the effect that in any triangle the three interior angles are
equal to two right angles."
a 0

2. Now, according to Proclus (p. 379, 2—5), Eudemus the Peripatetic
refers the discovery of this theorem to the Pythagoreans and gives what he
affirms to be their demonstration of it. This demonstration will be given
below, but it should be remarked that it is general, and therefore that the
"later geometers" spoken of by Geminus were presumably the Pythagoreans,
whence it appears that the " a n c i e n t s " contrasted with them must have
belonged to .the time of Thales, if they were not his Egyptian instructors.
3.
That the truth of the theorem was known to Thales might also
be inferred from the statement of Pamphile (quoted by Diogenes Laertius,
1. 24—S> P- 6, ed. Cobet) that " h e , having learnt geometry from the


