Egyptians, was the first to inscribe a right-angled triangle in a circle and
sacrificed an o x " (on the strength of i t ) ; in other words, he discovered that
the angle in a semicircle is a right angle. N o doubt, when this fact was once
discovered (empirically, say), the consideration of the two isosceles triangles
having the centre for vertex and the sides of the right angle for bases
respectively, with the help of the theorem of Eucl. I. 5, also known to
Thales, would easily lead to the conclusion that the sum of the angles of
a right-angled triangle is equal to two right angles, and it could be readily
inferred that the angles of any triangle were likewise equal to two right angles
(by resolving it into two right-angled triangles). But it is not easy to see how
the property of the angle in a semicircle could be proved except (in the reverse
order) by means of the equality of the sum of the angles of a right-angled
triangle to two right angles; and hence it is most natural to suppose, with
Cantor, that Thales proved it (if he did prove it) practically as Euclid does
in in. 3 1 , i.e. by means of 1. 32 as applied to right-angled triangles at all events.
If the theorem of 1. 32 was proved before Thales' time, or by Thales
himself, by the stages indicated in the note of Geminus, we may be satisfied
that the reconstruction of the argument of the older proof by Hankel
(pp. 96—7) and Cantor (i , pp. 143—4) is not far wrong. First, it must have
been observed that six angles equal to an angle of an equilateral triangle would,
if placed adjacent to one another round a common vertex, fill up the whole
space round that vertex. It is true that Proclus attributes to the Pythagoreans
the general theorem that only three kinds of regular polygons, the equilateral
triangle, the square and the regular hexagon, can fill up the entire space round
a point, but the practical knowledge that equilateral triangles have this
property could hardly have escaped the Egyptians, whether they made floors
with tiles in the form of equilateral triangles or regular hexagons (Allman,
Greek Geometry from Thales to Euclid, p. 12) or joined the ends of adjacent
radii of a figure like the six-spoked wheel, which was their common form of
wheel from the time of Ramses I I . of the nineteenth Dynasty, say 1300 B.C.
(Cantor, i , p. 109). It would then be clear that six angles equal to an angle
of an equilateral triangle are equal to four right angles, and therefore that the
three angles of an equilateral triangle are equal to two right angles. (It would
be as clear or clearer, from observation of a square divided into two triangles
by a diagonal, that an isosceles right-angled triangle has each of its equal
angles equal to half a right angle, so that an isosceles right-angled triangle
must have the sum of its angles equal to two right angles.) Next, with regard
to the equilateral triangle, it could not fail to be observed
that, if AD were drawn from the vertex A perpendicular
to the base BC, each of the two right-angled triangles so
formed would have the sum of its angles equal to two
right
,
s

8

angles; and this would be confirmed by completing the
/
rectangle ADCE, when it would be seen that the rectangle
/
(with its angles equal to four right angles) was divided by
f_
its diagonal into two equal triangles, each of which had B
the sum of its angles equal to two right angles. Next it
would be inferred, as the result of drawing the diagonal of any rectangle and
observing the equality of the triangles forming the two halves, that the sum of
the angles of any right-angled triangle is equal to two right angles, and hence
(the two congruent right-angled triangles being then placed so as to form one
isosceles triangle) that the same is true of any isosceles triangle. Only the
last step remained, namely that of observing that any triangle could be
regarded as the half of a rectangle (drawn as indicated in the next figure), or

