P R O P O S I T I O N 32

319

simply that any triangle could be divided into two right-angled triangles,
whence it would be inferred that in general the
sum of the angles of any triangle is equal to two
right angles.
Such would be the probabilities if we could
absolutely rely upon the statements attributed to
Pamphile and Geminus respectively. But in fact
there is considerable ground for doubt in both cases.
1. Pamphile's story of the sacrifice of an ox by Thales for joy at his
discovery that the angle in a semicircle is a right angle is too suspiciously like
the similar story told with reference to Pythagoras and his discovery of the
theorem of Eucl. 1. 47 (Proclus, p. 426, 6—9). And, as if this were not
enough, Diogenes Laertius immediately adds that "others, among whom is
Apollodorus the calculator (6 Aoyto-TiKo's), say it was Pythagoras" (sc. who
" inscribed the right-angled triangle in a circle "). Now Pamphile lived in the
reign of Nero (A.D. 54—68) and therefore some 700 years after the birth of
Thales (about 640 B . C . ) . I do not know on what Max Schmidt bases his
statement (Kulturhistoiische Beilrdgezur Kenntnis des griechischen undrdmischen
AUeriums, 1906, p. 3 1 ) that "other, much older, sources name Pythagoras as
the discoverer of the said proposition," because nothing more seems to be
known of Apollodorus than what is stated here by Diogenes Laertius. But it
would at least appear that Apollodorus was only one of several authorities
who attributed the proposition to Pythagoras, while Parrfphile is alone
mentioned as referring it to Thales. Again, the connexion of Pythagoras with
the investigation of the right-angled triangle makes it a priori more likely
that it would be he who would discover its relation to a semicircle. O n
the whole, therefore, the attribution to Thales would seem to be more than
doubtful.
2. A s regards Geminus' account of the three stages through which the
proof of the theorem of 1. 32 passed, we note, first, that it is certainly not
confirmed by Eudemus, who referred to the Pythagoreans the discovery of the
theorem that the sum of the angles of any triangle is equal to two right
angles and says nothing about any gradual stages by which it was proved.
Secondly, it must be admitted, I think, that in the evolution of the proof as
reconstructed by Hankel the middle stage is rather artificial and unnecessary,
since, once it is proved that any right-angled triangle has the sum of its angles
equal to two right angles, it is just as easy to pass at once to any scalene
triangle (which is decomposable into two unequal right-angled triangles) as to
the isosceles triangle made up of two congruent right-angled triangles. Thirdly,
as Heiberg has recently pointed out (Mathematisches zu Aristoteles, p. 20), it
is quite possible that the statement of Geminus from beginning to end is
simply due to a misapprehension of a passage of Aristotle (Anal. Post. I. 5,
74 a 25). Aristotle is illustrating his contention that a property is not
scientifically proved to belong to a class of things unless it is proved to belong
prinurily (ppSnov) and generally (KCL86\OU) to the whole of the class. His first
illustration relates to parallels making with a transversal angles on the same
side together equal to two right angles, and has been quoted above in the note
on 1. 27 (pp. 308—9). H i s second illustration refers to the transformation of
a proportion alternando, which (he says) "used at one time to be proved
separately " for numbers, lines, solids, and times, although it admits of being
proved of all at once by one demonstration. T h e third illustration i s : " For
the same reason, even if one should prove (ovS av TK &ti£y) with reference to

