BOOK

I

each (sort of) triangle, the equilateral, scalene and isosceles, separately, that
each has its angles equal to two right angles, either by one proof or by different
proofs, he does not yet know that the triangle, i.e. the triangle in general, has
its angles equal to two right angles, except in a sophistical sense, even though
there exists no triangle other than triangles of the kinds mentioned. For he
knows it, not qud triangle, nor of every triangle, except in a numerical sense
(TOT clpiO/xoy); he does not know it notionally (TOT' e'Sos) of every triangle, even
though there be actually no triangle which he does not know."
T h e difference between the phrase " used at one time to be proved " in
the second illustration and " if any one should prove " in the third appears to
indicate that, while the former referred to a historical fact, the latter does not;
the reference to a person who should prove the theorem of I. 32 for the three
kinds of triangle separately, and then claim that he had proved it generally,
states a purely hypothetical case, a mere illustration. Yet, coming after the
historical fact stated in the preceding illustration, it might not unnaturally give
the impression, at first sight, that it was historical too.
O n the whole, therefore, it would seem that we cannot safely go behind
the dictum of Eudemus that the discovery and proof of the theorem of I. 32
in all its generality were Pythagorean. This does not however preclude its
having been discovered by stages such as those above set out after Hankel
and Cantor. Nor need it be doubted that Thales and even his Egyptian
instructors had advanced some way on the same road, so far at all events as
to see that in an equilateral triangle, and in an isosceles right-angled triangle,
the sum of the angles is equal to two right angles.
T h e P y t h a g o r e a n proof.
T h i s proof, handed down by Eudemus (Proclus, p. 379, 2—15), is no less
elegant than that given by Euclid, and is a natural
development from the last figure in the reconA
structed argument of Hankel. It would be seen,
~ 7 V
after the theory of parallels was added to geometry,
\
that the actual drawing of the perpendicular and
\
the complete rectangle on BC as base was
/
\
unnecessary, and that the parallel to BC through
B
C
A was all that was required.
Let ABC be a triangle, and through A draw DE parallel to BC.
[1. 31]
Then, since BC, DE are parallel,
the alternate angles DAB, ABC axe. equal,
[1. 29]
and so are the alternate angles EAC, ACB also.
Therefore the angles ABC, ACB are together equal to the angles
DAB,
EAC.
A d d to each the angle BAC;
therefore the sum of the angles ABC, ACB, BAC is equal to the sum of the
angles DAB, BAC, CAE, that is, to two right angles.
E

E u c l i d ' s proof p r e - E u c l i d e a n .
T h e theorem of 1. 32 is Aristotle's favourite illustration when he wishes to
refer to some truth generally acknowledged, and so often does it occur that
it is often indicated by two or three words in themselves hardly intelligible,
e.g. TO oWiv opOals (Anal. Post. I. 24, 85 b 5) and V 7 r a p x « vavrl rpiywvif TO bvo
(ibid. 85 b n ) .
One passage (Metaph. 1051 a 24) makes it clear, as Heiberg (op. cit.

