P R O P O S I T I O N 32

321

p. 19) acutely observes, that in the proof as Aristotle knew it Euclid's
construction was used. " Why does the triangle make up two right angles ?
Because the angles about one point are equal to two right angles.
If then the
parallel to the side had been drawn up (dvfJKro), the fact would at once have
been clear from merely looking at the figure." T h e words " the angles about
one point" would equally fit the Pythagorean construction, but " d r a w n
upwards " applied to the parallel to a side can only indicate Euclid's.
A t t e m p t s at proof independently of parallels.
T h e most indefatigable worker on these lines was Legendre, and a sketch
of his work has been given in the note on Postulate 5 above.
One other attempted proof needs to be mentioned here because it has
found much favour. I allude to
T h i b a u t ' s method.
This appeared in Thibaut's Grundriss der reinen Mathematik, Gottingen
(2 ed. 1809, 3 ed. 1818), and is to the following effect.
Suppose CB produced to D, and let BD (produced to any necessary extent
either way) revolve in one direction (say
clockwise) first about B into the position
SMS
BA, then about A into the position of A C
x \
produced both ways, and lastly about C
/
N.
into the position CB produced both ways.
-jr
T h e argument then is that the straight
/
\
line BD has revolved through the sum of
. /
C\
the three exterior angles of the triangle.
'
\
But, since it has at the end of the revolution
assumed a position in the same straight line with its original position, it must
have revolved through four right angles.
Therefore the sum of the three exterior angles is equal to four right
angles;
from which it follows that the sum of the three angles of the triangle is equal
to two right angles.
But it is to be observed that the straight line BD revolves about different
points in it, so that there is translation combined with rotatory motion, and it
is necessary to assume as an axiom that the two motions are independent, and
therefore that the translation may be neglected.
Schumacher (letter to Gauss of 3 May, 1831) tried to represent the
rotatory motion graphically in a second figure as mere motion round a point;
but Gauss (letter of 17 May, 1831) pointed out in reply that he really
assumed, without proving it, a proposition to the effect that " If two straight
lines (1) and (2) which cut one another make angles A , A" with a straight
line (3) cutting both of them, and if a straight line (4) in the same plane is
likewise cut by (1) at an angle A', then (4) will be cut by (2) at the angle A".
But this proposition not only needs proof, but we may say that it is, in
essence, the very proposition to be proved " (see Engel and Stackel, Die
Theorie der Parallellinien von Euklid bis auf Gauss, 1895, P- 3 ° ) How easy it is to be deluded in this way is plainly shown by Proclus'
attempt on the same lines. H e says (p. 384, 1 3 — 2 1 ) that the truth of the
theorem is borne in upon us by the help of " common notions " only. " For,
if we conceive a straight line with two perpendiculars drawn to it at its ex­
tremities, and if we then suppose the perpendiculars to (revolve about
their feet and) approach one another, so as to form a triangle, we see that,
B

2

