to the extent to which they converge, they diminish the right, angles which
they made with the straight line, so that the amount taken from the right
angles is also the amount added to the vertical angle of the triangle, and the
three angles are necessarily made equal to two right angles." But a moment's
reflection shows that, so far from being founded on mere " common notions,"
the supposed proof assumes, to begin with, that, if the perpendiculars ap­
proach one another ever so little, they will then form a triangle immediately,
i.e., it assumes Postulate 5 itself; and the fact about the vertical angle can only
be seen by means of the equality of the alternate angles exhibited by drawing
a perpendicular from the vertex of the triangle to the base, i.e. a parallel to
either of the original perpendiculars.
E x t e n s i o n to p o l y g o n s .
T h e two important corollaries added to 1. 32 in Simson's edition are given
by Proclus; but Proclus' proof of the first is different from, and perhaps
somewhat simpler than, Simson's.
1. The sum of the interior angles of a convex rectilineal figure is equal to
twice as many right angles as the figure has sides,
less four.
D
For let one angular point A be joined to all
the other angular points with which it is not con­
nected already.
T h e figure is then divided into triangles, and
mere inspection shows
(1) that the number of triangles is two less
than the number of sides in the figure,
(2) that the sum of the angles of all the
triangles is equal to the sum of all the interior angles of the figure.
Since then the sum of the angles of each triangle is equal to two right angles
the sum of the interior angles of the figure is equal to 2 (n—2) right angles,
i.e. (2» - 4) right angles, where n is the number of sides in the figure.
2. The exterior angles of any convex rectilineal
figure are together equal to four right angles.
For the interior and exterior angles together are
equal to 2» right angles, where n is the number of sides.
A n d the interior angles are together equal to
(2H-4) right angles.
Therefore the exterior angles are together equal to
four right angles.
This last property is already quoted by Aristotle
as true o f all rectilineal figures in two passages (Anal.
Post. 1. 24, 85 b 38 and 11. 17, 99 a 19).

PROPOSITION 

33.


The straight
lines joining
equal and parallel
straight
lines (at the extremities
which are) in the same
directions
(respectively)
are themselves also equal and parallel.
Let AB, CD be equal and parallel, and let the straight
s lines AC, BD join them (at the extremities which are) in the
same directions (respectively);


