I say that AC, BD are also equal and parallel.
Let BC be joined.
Then, since AB is parallel to CD,
10 and BC has fallen upon them,
the alternate angles ABC,
BCD
are equal to one another.
[1. 29]
And, since AB is equal to CD,
and BC is common,
15
the two sides AB, BC are equal to the two sides DC, CB;
and the angle ABC is equal to the angle BCD;
therefore the base A C is equal to the base BD,
and the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle DCB,
and the remaining angles will be equal to the remaining angles
20 respectively, namely those which the equal sides subtend ; [1. 4]
therefore the angle A CB is equal to the angle CBD.
And, since the straight line BC falling on the two straight
lines AC, BD has made the alternate angles equal to one
another,
25

AC is parallel to BD.
And it was also proved equal to it.
Therefore etc.

•

[1. 27]

Q. E. D.

1. joining...(at the extremities which are) in the same directions (respectively).
I have for clearness' sake inserted the words in brackets though they are not in the original
Greek, which has "joining...in the same directions" or "on the same sides," ivl ra oAra pjkpi\
ixt(eiiyyiovirai. The expression "towards the same parts," though usage has sanctioned it,
is perhaps not quite satisfactory.
15. D C , C B and 18. D C B . The Greek has " BC, CD" and "BCD'" in these places
respectively. Euclid is not always careful to write in corresponding order the letters denoting
corresponding points in congruent figures. On the contrary, he evidently prefers the alpha­
betical order, and seems to disdain to alter it for the sake of beginners or others who might
be confused by it. In the case of angles alteration is perhaps unnecessary j but in the case
of triangles and pairs of corresponding sides I have ventured to alter the order to that which
the mathematician of to-day expects.

This proposition is, as Proclus says (p. 385, 5), the connecting link between
the exposition of the theory of parallels and the investigation of parallelograms.
For, while it only speaks of equal and parallel straight lines connecting those
ends of equal and parallel straight lines which are in the same directions, it
gives, without expressing the fact, the construction or origin of the parallelogram,
so that in the next proposition Euclid is able to speak of " parallelogrammic
areas" without any further explanation.

PROPOSITION

34.

In parallelogrammic
are equal to one another,
Let ACDB
diameter;


areas the opposite sides and angles
and the diameter bisects the areas.

be a parallelogrammic area, and BC

its


