P R O P O S I T I O N 34

3*5

I* It is to be observed that, when parallelograms have to be mentioned for the first time,
Euclid calls them "parallelogrammic areas" or, more exactly, "parallelogram" areas
{jrapa\\i}\6ypafxfxa
xujxa)- The meaning is simply areas bounded by parallel straight lines
with the further limitation placed upon the term by Euclid that only four-sidedfiguresare so
called, although of course there are certain regular polygons which have opposite sides
parallel, and which therefore might be said to be areas bounded by parallel straight lines. We
gather from Proclus (p. 393) that the word " parallelogram " was first introduced by Euclid,
that its use was suggested by I. 33, and that the formation of the word TrapaWrjXbypafipun
(parallel-lined) was analogous to that of tiB&ypatifun (straight-lined or rectilineal).
17, 18, 40. D C B and 36. D C , C B . The Greek has in these places "BCD" and
"CD, BC" respectively. Cf. note on I. 33, lines 15, 18.

After specifying the particular kinds of parallelograms (squares and rhombi)
in which the diagonals bisect the angles which they join, as well as the areas,
and those (rectangles and rhomboids) in which the diagonals do not bisect
the angles, Proclus proceeds (pp. 390 sqq.) to analyse this proposition with
reference to the distinction in Aristotle's Anal. Post. (1. 4, 5, 73 a 2 1 — 7 4 b 4)
between attributes which are only predicable of every individual thing (KOTO
iran-os) in a class and those which are true of it primarily (TOVTOV irpdrov) and
generally (KO$6X.OV). W e are apt, says Aristotle, to mistake a proof KOTO
irafrd? for a proof TOVTOV irpwrov KO.0OA.OV because it is either impossible to
find a higher generality to comprehend all the particulars of which the
predicate is true, or to find a name for it. (Part of this passage of Aristotle
has been quoted above in the note on 1. 32, pp. 319—320.)
Now, says Proclus, adapting Aristotle's distinction to theorems, the present
proposition exhibits the distinction between theorems which are general and
theorems which are not general. According to Proclus, the first part of
the proposition stating that the opposite sides and angles of a parallelogram
are equal is general because the property is only true of parallelograms; but
the second part which asserts that the diameter bisects the area is not general
because it does not include all the figures of which this property is true, e.g.
circles and ellipses. Indeed, says Proclus, the first attempts upon problems
seem usually to have been of this partial character (/icptKarrepai), and generality
was only attained by degrees* T h u s " t h e ancients, after investigating the
fact that the diameter bisects an ellipse, a circle, and a parallelogram
respectively, proceeded to investigate what was common to these cases,"
though " it is difficult to show what is common to an ellipse, a circle and a
parallelogram."
I doubt whether the supposed distinction between the two parts of the
proposition, in point of " generality," can be sustained. Proclus himself admits
that it is presupposed that the subject of the proposition is a quadrilateral,
because there are other figures (e.g. regular polygons of an even number of
sides) besides parallelograms which have their opposite sides and angles
equal; therefore the second part of the theorem is, in this respect, no more
general than the other, and, if we are entitled to the tacit limitation of the
theorem to quadrilaterals in one part, we are equally entitled to it in the other.
It would almost appear as though Proclus had drawn the distinction for
the mere purpose of alluding to investigations by Greek geometers on the
general subject of diameters of all sorts of figures; and it may have been these
which brought the subject to the point at which Apollonius could say in the
first definitions at the beginning of his Conies that " In any bent line, such as
is in one plane, I give the name diameter to any straight line which, being
drawn from the bent line, bisects all the straight lines (chords) drawn in the
line parallel to any straight line." T h e term bent line (Ka/nruKi] ypa/i/xr])
includes, e.g. in Archimedes, not only curves, but any composite line made

