up of straight lines and curves joined together in any manner. It is of course
clear that either diagonal of a parallelogram bisects all lines drawn within the
parallelogram parallel to the other diagonal.
An-Nairizi gives after I. 31 a neat construction for dividing a straight line
into any number of equal parts (ed. Curtze, p . 74, ed. Besthorn-Heiberg,
pp. 1 4 1 — 3 ) which requires only one measurement repeated, together with the
properties of parallel lines including 1. 33, 34. A s 1. 33, 34 are assumed, I
place the problem here. T h e particular case taken is the problem of dividing
a straight line into three equal parts.
Let AB be the given straight line. Draw AC, BD at right angles to it
on opposite sides.
An-Nairizi takes AC, BD of the same
length and then bisects AC at E and BD
at F. B u t of course it is even simpler to
measure AE, EC along o n e perpendicular
equal and of any length, and BE, ED along
the other also equal and of the same length.
Join ED, CE meeting AB in G, H
respectively.
Then shall AG, GH, HB all be equal.
Draw HK parallel to AC, or at right
angles to AB.
Since now EC, ED are equal and parallel,
ED, CEaxe equal and parallel.
[1. 33]
A n d HK was drawn parallel to AC.
Therefore ECHK is a parallelogram ; whence KH is equal as well as
parallel to EC, and therefore to EA.
T h e triangles EAG, KHG have now two angles respectively equal and the
sides AE, HK equal.
Thus the triangles are equal in all respects, and
A G is equal to GH.
Similarly the triangles KHG, FBH are equal in all respects, and
GH is equal to HB.
If now we wish to extend the problem to the case where AB is to be
divided into « parts, we have only to measure (»— 1) successive equal lengths
along AC and (n— 1) successive lengths, each equal to the others, along BD.
T h e n join the first point arrived at on AC to the last point on BD, the
second on A C to the last but one on BD, and so o n ; and the joining lines
cut AB in points dividing it into « equal parts.

PROPOSITION 

35.


Parallelograms
which are on the same base and in tlte
same parallels
are equal to one another.
Let A BCD,
BC

EBCF

be parallelograms on the same base

and in the same parallels AF,

BC;

s I say that ABCD
is equal to the parallelogram
For, since ABCD
is a parallelogram,
AD

is equal to BC.

EBCF.
[1. 34]


