328

BOOK

I

[i. 3s

the same area (the triangle GBC) to each of the latter " e q u a l " trapezia, and
inferring the equality of the respective sums (the two given parallelograms).
A s is well known, Simson (after Clairaut) slightly altered the proof in order
to make it applicable to all the three possible cases. T h e alteration
substituted one step of subtracting congruent areas (the triangles AEB, DEC)
from one and the same area (the trapezium ABCE) for the two steps above
shown of first subtracting and then adding a certain area.
While, in either case, nothing more is explicitly used than the axioms that,
if equals be added to equals, the wholes are equal and that, if equals be subtracted
from equals, the remainders are equal, there is the further tacit assumption that
it is indifferent to what part or from what part of the same or equal areas the
same or equal areas are added or subtracted. D e Morgan observes that the
postulate " a n area taken from an area leaves the same area from whatever
part it may be taken " is particularly important as the key to equality of nonrectilineal areas which could not be cut into coincidence geometrically.
Legendre introduced the word equivalent to express this wider sense of
equality, restricting the term equal to things equal in the sense of congruent;
and this distinction has been found convenient.
I do not think it necessary, nor have I the space, to give any account of
the recent developments of the theory of equivalence on new lines represented
by the researches of W. Bolyai, Duhamel, D e Zolt, Stolz, Schur, Veronese,
Hilbert and others, and must refer the reader to U g o Amaldi's article Sulla
teoria dell' equivalenza in Questioni riguardanli le matematiche elementari, l,
(Bologna, 1912), pp. 1 4 5 — 1 9 8 , and to Max Simon, Uber die Entwicklung der
Elementar-geometrie im XIX. Jahrhunderi (Leipzig, 1906), pp. 1 1 5 — 1 2 0 , with
their full references to the literature of the subject. I may however refer to
the suggestive distinction of phraseology used by Hilbert (Grundlagen der
Geometric, pp. 39, 40) :
(1) " T w o polygons are called divisibly-equal (zerlegungsgleich) if they can
be divided into a finite number of triangles which are congruent two and two."
(2) " T w o polygons are called equal in content (inhaltsgleich) or of equal
content if it is possible to add divisibly-equal polygons to them in such a way
that the two combined polygons are divisibly-equal."
(Amaldi suggests as alternatives for the terms in (1) and (2) the expressions
equivalent by sum and equivalent by difference respectively.)
From these definitions it follows that " b y combining divisibly-equal
polygons we again arrive at divisibly-equal polygons; and, if we subtract
divisibly-equal polygons from divisibly-equal polygons, the polygons remaining
are equal in content."
The proposition also follows without difficulty that, " i f two polygons are
divisibly-equal to a third polygon, they are also divisibly-equal to one another;
and, if two polygons are equal in content to a third polygon, they are equal in
content to one another."
T h e different c a s e s .
A s usual, Proclus (pp. 399—400), observing that Euclid has given only the
most difficult of the three possible cases, adds the other two with separate
proofs. I n the case where E in the figure of the proposition falls between A
and D, he adds the congruent triangles ABE, DCE respectively to the
smaller trapezium EBCD, instead of subtracting them (as Simson does) from
the larger trapezium ABCE.

