P R O P O S I T I O N 35
A n ancient " B u d g e t of P a r a d o x e s . "
Proclus observes (p. 396, 12 sqq.) that the present theorem and the
similar one relating to triangles are among the so-called paradoxical theorems
of mathematics, since the uninstructed might well regard it as impossible that
the area of the parallelograms should remain the same while the length of the
sides other than the base and the side opposite to it may increase indefinitely.
H e adds that mathematicians had made a collection of such paradoxes, the
so-called treasury of paradoxes (6 7rapa8o£o? TOVOS)—cf. the similar expressions
TOVOS dvaXvoptvos (treasury of analysis) and TOTTOS do-Tpovop.ovp.evot—in the same
way as the Stoics with their illustrations (<oo-jrep 01 dwb rr/s Sroas «rl T W
otry/toiw). It may be that this treasury of paradoxes was the work of
Erycinus quoted by Pappus ( m . p. 107, 8) and mentioned above (note on
1. 21, p. 290).
L o c u s - t h e o r e m s and loci in Greek g e o m e t r y .
The proposition 1. 35 is, says Proclus (pp. 394—6), the first locus-theorem
(TOWIKOV
6tiopi)ixa) given by Euclid.
Accordingly it is in his note on this
proposition that Proclus gives us his view of the nature of a locus-theorem
and of the meaning of the word locus (TOVOS) ; and great importance attaches
to his words because he is one of the three writers (Pappus and Eutocius
being the two others) upon whom we have to rely for all that is known of the
Greek conception of geometrical loci.
Proclus' explanation (pp. 394, 15—395, 2) is as follows. " I call those
(theorems) locus-theorems (TOTTIKCI) in which the same property is found to exist
on the whole of some locus (irpo? o\u> reel T6V<J>), and (I call) a locus a position
of a line or a surface producing one and the same property (ypappij'i lj ««<f>avci'as Oiaiy nuiuvrrav tv KOI rairbv <rip.imopa). For, of locUS-theorems, some
are constructed on lines and others on surfaces (rmv yap romKiav TO. p.iv icrn
irpbs ypappaK o-wio-rdptva, TO. Si irp6 lm<pavtuu%). A n d , since some lines are
plane (iViireSoi) and others solid (crcptaC)—those being plane which are simply
conceived of in a plane (m iv «mre'8<i> dv\ij ij K>IJO-«), and those solid the
origin of which is revealed from some section of a solid figure, as the cylin­
drical helix and the conic lines (<os rf/s KvkivSpucrjs IXucot KCU rmv KWIKIOV
ypap.pMv)—I should say (<p<uV av) further that, of locus-theorems on lines,
some give a plane locus and others a solid locus."
Leaving out of sight for the moment the class of loci on surfaces, we find
that the distinction between plane and solid loci, or plane and solid lines, was
similarly understood by Eutocius, who says (Apollonius, ed. Heiberg, 11.
p. 184) that "solid loci have obtained their name from the fact that the lines
used in the solution of problems regarding them have their origin in the
section of solids, for example the sections of the cone and several others."
Similarly we gather from Pappus that plane loci were straight lines and circles,
and solid loci were conies. Thus he tells us (vii. p. 672, 20) that Aristaeus
wrote five books of Solid Loci " supplementary to (literally, continuous with)
the c o n i e s " ; and, though Hultsch brackets the passage ( v n . p. 662, 1 0 — 1 5 )
which says plainly that plane loci are straight lines and circles, while solid loci
are sections of cones, i.e. parabolas, ellipses and hyperbolas, we have the
exactly corresponding distinction drawn by Pappus ( i n . p. 54, 7 — 1 6 ) between
plane and solid problems, plane problems being those solved by means of
straight lines and circumferences of circles, and solid problems those solved
by means of one or more of the sections of the cone. But, whereas Proclus
r

