33°

BOOK

I

[i. 35

and Eutocius speak of other solid loci besides conies, there is nothing in
Pappus to support the wider application of the term. According to Pappus
(in. p. 54, 1 6 — 2 1 ) problems which could not be solved by means of straight
lines, circles, or conies were linear (yoa/x/xua) because they used for their
construction lines having a more complicated and unnatural origin than those
mentioned, namely such curves as guadratrices, conchoids and cissoids.
Similarly, in the passage supposed to be interpolated, linear loci are distin­
guished as those which are neither straight lines nor circles nor any of the
conic sections (vii. p. 662, 1 3 — 1 5 ) . Thus the classification given by Proclus
and Eutocius is less precise than that which we find in Pappus; and the
inclusion by Proclus of the cylindrical helix among solid loci, on the ground
that it arises from a section of a solid figure, would seem to be, in any case,
due to some misapprehension.
Comparing these passages and the hints in Pappus about loci on surfaces
(TOTTOI
irpos iirifpavtia) with special reference to Euclid's two books under that
title, Heiberg concludes that loci on lines and loci on surfaces in Proclus'
explanation are loci which are lines and loci which are surfaces respectively.
But some qualification is necessary as regards Proclus' conception of loci on
lines, because he goes on to say (p. 395, 5), with reference to this proposition,
that, while the locus is a locus on lines and moreover plane, it is " the whole
space between the parallels " which is the locus of the various parallelograms
on the same base proved to be equal in area. Similarly, when he quotes
in. 21 about the equality of the angles in the same segment and m . 31 about
the right angle in a semicircle as cases where a circumference of a circle
takes the place of a straight line in a plane locus-theorem, he appears to
imply that it is the segment or semicircle as an area which is regarded as the
locus of an infinite number of triangles with the same base and equal vertical
angles, rather than that it is the circumference which is the locus of the angular
points. Likewise he gives the equality of parallelograms inscribed in " t h e
asymptotes and the hyperbola " as an example of a solid locus-theorem, as if
the area included between the curve and its asymptotes was regarded as the
locus of the equal parallelograms. However this may be, it is clear that the
locus in the present proposition can only be either ( 1 ) a //»«-locus of a line,
not a point, or (2) an areaAocas of an area, not a point or a line; and we
seem to be thus brought to another and different classification of loci
corresponding to that quoted by Pappus (vn. p. 660, 18 sqq.) from the pre­
liminary exposition given by Apollonius in his Plane Loci. According to this,
loci in general are of three kinds: ( 1 ) itptKTucoi, kolding-in, in which sense
the locus of a point is a point, of a line a line, of a surface a surface, and of a
solid a solid, (2) SU(OSIKOC, moving along, a line being in this sense a locus of a
point, a surface of a line and a solid of a surface, (3) dvacrrpotpiKoi, where a
surface is a locus of a point and a solid of a line. Thus the locus in this
proposition, whether it is the space between the two parallels regarded as the
locus of the equal parallelograms, or the line parallel to the base regarded as
the locus of the sides opposite to the base, would seem to be of the first class
(l<t>(KTiK6\); and, as Proclus takes the former view of it, a locus on lines is
apparently not merely a locus which is a line but a locus bounded by lines
also, the locus being plane in the particular case because it is bounded by
straight lines, or, in the case of III. 21, 3 1 , by straight lines and circles, but
not by any higher curves.
Proclus notes lastly (p. 395, 1 3 — 2 1 ) that, according to Geminus,
" Chrysippus likened locus-theorems to the ideas. For, as the ideas confine

