societies in his own time who cheated their fellow members by giving them
land of greater perimeter but less area than they took themselves, so that, on
the one hand, they got a reputation for greater honesty while, on the other, they
took more than their share of produce. Cantor (Gesch. d. Math. i , p. 172)
quotes several remarks of ancient authors which show the prevalence of the
same misconception. Thus Thucydides estimates the size of Sicily according
to the time required for circumnavigating it. A b o u t 130 B.C. Polybius said
that there were people who could not understand that camps of the same
periphery might have different capacities. Quintilian has a similar remark,
and Cantor thinks he may have had in his mind the calculations of Pliny, who
compares the size of different parts of the earth by adding their length to their
breadth.
T h e comparison however of the areas of different figures of equal contour
had not been neglected by mathematicians.
Theon of Alexandria, in his
commentary on Book 1. of Ptolemy's Syntaxis, has preserved a number of
propositions on the subject taken from a treatise by Zenodorus irepi iaofiirpiov
o-xr//Mi7w (reproduced in Latin on pp. 1 1 9 0 — 1 2 1 1 of Hultsch's edition of
Pappus) which was written at some date between, say, 200 B.C. ^...d 90 A . D . ,
and probably not long after the former date. Pappus too has at the beginning
of Book v. of his Collection (pp. 308 sqq.) the same propositions, in which he
appears to have followed Zenodorus pretty closely while making some changes
in detail. T h e propositions proved by Zenodorus and Pappus include the
following: ( 1 ) that, of all polygons of the same number of sides and equal
perimeter, the equilateral and equiangular polygon is the greatest in area,
(2) that, of regular polygons of equal perimeter, that is the greatest in area
which has the most angles, (3) that a circle is greater than any regular polygon
of equal contour, (4) that, of all circular segments in which the arcs are equal in
length, the semicircle is the greatest. T h e treatise of Zenodorus was not con­
fined to propositions about plane figures, but gave also the theorem that, of
all solid figures the surfaces of which are equal, the sphere is the greatest in
volume.
3

PROPOSITION 

38.


Triangles
which are on equal bases
parallels
are equal to one another.
Let ABC,

DEF

and in the

same

be triangles on equal bases BC, EF

and

in the same parallels BE,

AD

;

I say that the triangle ABC
is
equal to the triangle
DEF.
For let AD be produced in
both directions to G, H;
through

B

let BG

be drawn

parallel to CA,

Q

B

A

C

D

H

E

F

[1. 3 ' ]

and through F let FH be drawn parallel to DE.
Then each of the figures GBCA,
DEFH
is a parallelo­
gram ;

and GBCA

is equal to

DEFH;


