for they are on equal bases BC,
parallels BF, GH.

EF

and in the same
[1. 36]

Moreover the triangle ABC
is half of the parallelogram
GBCA
; for the diameter AB bisects it.
[1. 34]
A n d the triangle FED is half of the parallelogram
DEFH;
for the diameter DF bisects it.
[1. 34]
[But the halves of equal things are equal to one another.]
Therefore the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle DEF.
Therefore etc.

Q. E. D.

O n this proposition Proclus remarks (pp. 405—6) that Euclid seems to
him to have given in v i . 1 one proof including all the four theorems from
1. 35 to 1. 38, and that most people had failed to notice this. When Euclid,
he says, proves that triangles and parallelograms of the same altitude have to
one another the same ratio as their bases, he simply proves all these
propositions more generally by the use of proportion; for of course to be of
the same altitude is equivalent to being in the same parallels. It is true that
v i . 1 generalises these propositions, but it must be observed that it does not
prove the propositions themselves, as Proclus seems to imply; they are in fact
assumed in order to prove v i . 1.
C o m p a r i s o n of areas of triangles of I . 3 4 .
T h e theorem already mentioned as given by Proclus on 1. 24 (pp. 340—4)
is placed here by Heron, who also enunciates it more clearly (an-Nairizi, ed.
Besthorn-Heiberg, pp. 1 5 5 — 1 6 1 , ed. Curtze, pp. 75—8).
If in two triangles two sides of the one be equal to two sides of the other
respectively, and the angle of the one be greater than the angle of the other,
namely the angles contained by the equal sides, then, (1) if the sum of the two
angles contained by the equal sides is equal to two right angles, the two triangles
are equal to one another ; (2) if less than two right angles, the triangle which
has the greater angle is also itself greater than the other; (3) if greater than two
right angles, the triangle which has the less angle is greater than the other
triangle.
A

P

L e t two triangles ABC, DEEbvie
the sides AB, AC respectively equal
to DE, DE.
(1) First, suppose that the angles at A and D in the triangles ABC,
DEE art together equal to two right angles.
Heron's construction is now as follows.
Make the angle EDG equal to the angle BAC.
Draw FH parallel to ED meeting DG in H.
Join EH.


