5. [I say that they are also in the same parallels.] Heiberg has proved (Hermes,
XXXVIII., 1903, p. 50) from a recently discovered papyrus-fragment {Fayiim towns and their
papyri, p. 90, No. IX.) that these words are an interpolation by some one who did not observe
that the words "And let A D be joined " are part of the setting-out (*/cff«rir), but took them
as belonging to the construction (/rara<r«ui)) and consequently thought that a Siopia^b's or
"definition (of the thing to be proved) should precede. The interpolator then altered
" And " into " For " in the next sentence.
This theorem is of course the partial converse of 1. 37. In 1. 37 we have
triangles which are (1) on the same base, (2) in the same parallels, and the
theorem proves (3) that the triangles are equal. Here the hypothesis (1) and
the conclusion (3) are combined as hypotheses, and the conclusion is the
hypothesis (2) of 1. 37, that the triangles are in the same parallels. T h e
additional qualification in this proposition that the triangles must be on the
same side of the base is necessary because it is not, as in 1. 37, involved in the
other hypotheses.
Proclus (p. 407, 4 — 1 7 ) remarks that Euclid only converts 1. 37 and 1. 38
relative to triangles, and omits the converses of 1. 35, 36 about parallelograms
as unnecessary because it is easy to see that the method would be the same,
and therefore the reader may properly be left to prove them for himself.
The proof is, as Proclus points out (p. 408, 5—21), equally easy on the
supposition that the assumed parallel AE meets BD or CD produced
beyond D.

PROPOSITION 

40.

Equal triangles which are on equal bases and on the
side are also in the same
parallels.

same

Let ABC,
CDE be equal triangles on equal bases
and on the same side.

BC,

CE

I say that they are also in the same parallels.
For let AD

be joined;

I say that AD is parallel to BE.
For, if not, let AFbe
drawn through
A parallel to BE [1. 3 1 ] , and let EE be
joined.
Therefore the triangle ABC is equal
to the triangle ECE;
for they are on equal bases BC,

BE,

A f

.

CE and in the same parallels

AF.

[i- 38]

But the triangle ABC

is equal to the triangle

therefore the triangle DCE

DCE;

is also equal to the triangle

FCE,

[C. N. 1]
the greater to the less : which is impossible.
Therefore AF

is not parallel to

BE.


