1. complements, rrapaxkripiiiiara, thefiguresput in to fill up (interstices).
4. and about A C . . . Euclid's phraseology here and in the next proposition implies
that the complements as well as the other parallelograms are " about" the diagonal. The
words are here rtpl Si rip> AT ra/uXXi)XA--/>a/i/ia |Uv (era ra E8, ZH, TA M Xeyi/ura
vapar\riP<iimTa T4 BK, KA. The expression " the so-called complements " indicates that
this technical use of rapH-Xifpii/uiTa was not new, though it might not be universally known.

In the text of Proclus' commentary as we have it, the end of the note on
1. 4 1 , the whole of that on 1. 42, and the beginning of that on 1. 43 are
missing.
Proclus remarks (p. 418, 15—20) that Euclid did not need to give a
formal definition of complement because the name was simply suggested by the
facts; when once we have the two "parallelograms about the diameter,"
the complements are necessarily the areas remain­
ing over on each side of the diameter, which fill
up the complete parallelogram. Thus (p. 417,
1 sqq.) the complements need not be parallelo­
grams. They are so if the two "parallelograms
about the diameter" are formed by straight lines
drawn through one point of the diameter parallel
to the sides of the original parallelogram, but not
otherwise. If, as in the first of the accompanying figures, the parallelograms
have no common point, the complements are five-sided figures as shown.
When the parallelograms overlap, as in the second figure, Proclus regards
the complements as being the small parallelo­
grams FG, EH. But, if complements are strictly
the areas required to fill up the original parallelo­
gram, Proclus is inaccurate in describing FG, EH
as the complements. T h e complements are really
(1) the parallelogram FG minus the triangle LMN,
and (2) the parallelogram EH minus the triangle
KMN, respectively; the possibility that the re­
spective differences may be negative merely means the possibility that the
sum o f the two parallelograms about the diameter may be together greater
than the original parallelogram.
In all the cases it is easy to show, as Proclus does, that the complements
are still equal.

PROPOSITION

To a given straight
line
angle, a parallelogram
equal

44.

to apply, in a given
to a given
triangle.

rectilineal

Let AB be the given straight line, C the given triangle
and D the given rectilineal angle;
5 thus it is required to apply to the given straight line AB, in
an angle equal to the angle D, a parallelogram equal to the
given triangle C.
Let the parallelogram BEFG
be constructed equal to
the triangle C, in the angle EBG which is equal to D [1. 4 2 ] ;
o let it be placed so that BE is in a straight line with AB;
let

