P R O P O S I T I O N 44

343

obtained, the transformation of a parallelogram of any shape into another
with the same angle and of equal area but with one side of any given
length, e.g. a unit length, and (2) of the simplicity of the means employed,
namely the mere application o f the property that the complements of the
"parallelograms about the diameter" of a parallelogram are equal. T h e
marvellous ingenuity of the solution is indeed worthy of the " godlike men of
old," as Proclus calls the discoverers of the method of "application of areas";
and there would seem to be no reason to doubt that the particular solution,
like the whole theory, was Pythagorean, and not a new solution due to Euclid
himself.
Application of areas.
On this proposition Proclus gives (pp. 419, 15—420, 23) a valuable note
on the method of " application of areas " here introduced, which was one of
the most powerful methods on which Greek geometry relied. T h e note runs
as follows:
" These things, says Eudemus (ol irtpl TOT EvSjj/nof), are ancient and are
discoveries of the Muse of the Pythagoreans, I mean the application 0/areas
(wapafioXri rwv x^piW), their exceeding (iirtpfiokri) and their falling-short
(fAA«i/as). It was from the Pythagoreans that later geometers [i.e. Apollonius]
took the names, which they again transferred to the so-called conic lines,
designating one of these a parabola (application), another a hyperbola
(exceeding) and another an ellipse (falling-short), whereas those godlike men
of old saw the things signified by these names in the construction, in a plane,
of areas upon a finite straight line. For, when you have a straight line set
out and lay the given area exactly alongside the whole of the straight line, then
they say that you apply (irapafid\Kti.v) the said area; when however you
make the length of the area greater than the straight line itself, it is said to
exceed (mtpfiaWtiv), and when you make it less, in which case, after the area
has been drawn, there is some part of the straight line extending beyond it,
it is said to fall short (ikKtlirav). Euclid too, in the sixth book, speaks in
this way both of exceeding and falling-short; but in this place he needed the
application simply, as he sought to apply to a given straight line an area .equal
to a given triangle in order that we might have in our power, not only the
construction (O-UO-TOO-IS) of a parallelogram equal to a given triangle, but also
the application of it to a finite straight line For example, given a triangle
with an area of 12 feet, and a straight line set out the length of which is
4 feet, we apply to the straight line the area equal to the triangle if we take
the whole length of 4 feet and find how many feet the breadth must be in
order that the parallelogram may be equal to the triangle. In the particular
case, if we find a breadth of 3 feet and multiply the length into the breadth,
supposing that the angle set out is a right angle, we shall have the area. Such
then is the application handed down from early times by the Pythagoreans."
Other passages to a similar effect are quoted from Plutarch. (1) " P y t h a ­
goras sacrificed an ox on the strength of his proposition (hid.ypap.pa.) as
Apollodotus (?-rus) says...whether it was the theorem of the hypotenuse, viz.
that the square on it is equal to the squares on the sides containing the
right angle, or the problem about the application of an area." (Non posse
suaviter vivi secundum Epicurum, c. I I . ) (2) " A m o n g the most geometrical
theorems, or rather problems, is the following: given two figures, to apply a
third equal to the one and similar to the other, on the strength of which
discovery they say moreover that Pythagoras sacrificed.
This is indeed
unquestionably more subtle and more scientific than the theorem which

