demonstrated that the square on the hypotenuse is equal to the squares on
the sides about the right a n g l e " (Symp. v m . 2, 4).
T h e story of the sacrifice must (as noted by Bretschneider and Hankel)
be given up as inconsistent with Pythagorean ritual, which forbade such
sacrifices; but there is no reason to doubt that the first distinct formulation
and introduction into Greek geometry of the method of application of areas
was due to the Pythagoreans. T h e complete exposition of the application of
areas, their exceeding and their falling-short, and of the construction of a
rectilineal figure equal to one given figure and similar to another, takes us
into the sixth Book of E u c l i d ; but it will be convenient to note here the
general features of the theory of application, exceeding and falling-short.
T h e simple application of a parallelogram of given area to a given
straight line as one of its sides is what we have in I. 44 and 45 ; the general
form of the problem with regard to exceeding and falling-short may be stated
thus:
" T o apply to a given straight line a rectangle (or, more generally, a
parallelogram) equal to a given rectilineal figure and (1) exceeding or
(2) falling-short by a square (or, in the more general case, a parallelogram
similar to a given parallelogram)."
What is meant by saying that the applied parallelogram (1) exceeds or
(2) falls short is that, while its base coincides and is coterminous at one end
with the straight line, the said base (1) overlaps or (2) falls short of the
straight line at the other end, and the portion by which the applied
parallelogram exceeds a parallelogram of the same angle and height on the
given straight line (exactly) as base is a parallelogram similar to a given
parallelogram (or, in particular cases, a square). In the case where the
parallelogram is to fall short, a 8iop«r/*o'j is necessary to express the condition
of possibility of solution.
We shall have occasion to see, when we come to the relative propositions
in the second and sixth Books, that the general problem here stated is
equivalent to that of solving geometrically a mixed quadratic equation. W e
shall see that, even by means of II. 5 and 6, we can solve geometrically the
equations
ax± x = b*,
x* - ax = b*;
2

but in v i . 28, 29 Euclid gives the equivalent of the solution of the general
equations
* .
C
ax + - x =? — .
~ c
m
W e are now in a position to understand the application of the terms
parabola (application), hyperbola (exceeding) and ellipse (falling-short) to
conic sections. These names were first so applied by Apollonius as expressing
in each case the fundamental property of the curves as stated by him. This
fundamental property is the geometrical equivalent of the Cartesian equation
referred to any diameter of the conic and the tangent at its extremity as (in
general, oblique) axes. I f the parameter of the ordinates from the several
points of the conic drawn to the given diameter be denoted by p (p being
accordingly, in the case of the hyperbola and ellipse, equal to - y , where d is
the length of the given diameter and d' that of its conjugate), Apollonius gives
the properties of the three conies in the following form.

