what has been fitly called the geometrical algebra of the Greeks. We have
now learnt how to represent any rectilineal area, which can of course b e
resolved into triangles, by a single parallelogram having one side equal to any
given straight line and one angle equal to any given rectilineal angle. Most
important of all such parallelograms is the rectangle, which is one of the simplest
forms in which an area can be shown. Since a rectangle corresponds to the
product of two magnitudes in algebra, we see that application to a given
straight line of a rectangle equal to a given area is the geometrical equivalent
of algebraical division of the product of two quantities by a third. Further
than this, it enables us to add or subtract any rectilineal areas and to represent
the sum or difference by one rectangle with one side of any given length, the
process being the equivalent of ob aining a common factor. But one step
still remains, the finding of a squure equal to a given rectangle, i.e. to a
given rectilineal figure; and this step is not taken till II. 14. In general,
the transformation of combinations of rectangles and squares into other
combinations of rectangles and squares is the subject-matter of Book 11., with
the exception of the expression of the sum of two squares as a single square
which appears earlier in the other Pythagorean theorem 1. 47. T h u s the
transformation of rectilineal areas is made complete in one direction, i.e. in the
direction of their simplest expression in terms of rectangles and squares, by the
end of Book 11. T h e reverse process of transforming the simpler rectangular
area into an equal area which shall be similar to any rectilineal figure requires,
of course, the use of proportions, and therefore does not appear till vi. 25.
f

Proclus adds to his note on this proposition the remark (pp. 422, 24—
423, 6 ) : " I conceive that it was in consequence o f this problem that the
ancient geometers were led to investigate the squaring of the circle as well.
For, if a parallelogram can be found equal to any rectilineal figure, it is worth
inquiring whether it be not also possible to prove rectilineal figures equal to
circular. A n d Archimedes actually proved that any circle is equal to the
right-angled triangle which has one of its sides about the right angle [the
perpendicular] equal to the radius of the circle and its base equal to the
perimeter of the circle. B u t of this elsewhere."

PROPOSITION 

46.


On a given straight
Let AB

line to describe a square.

be the given straight line ;

c

thus it is required to describe a square
on the straight line
5

AB.

Let AC be drawn at right angles to
the straight line AB from the point A
on it [1. 1 1 ] , and let AD be made equal
to AB;
through the point D let DE

D

i

E

be drawn

10 parallel to AB,
and through the point B let BE

A

be drawn parallel to

B

AD.
[i- 3 i ]


