And, since DB is equal to BC, and FB to BA,
the two sides AB, BD are equal to the two sides FB,
respectively ,
35

and the angle ABD

is equal to the angle

BC

FBC;

therefore the base AD is equal to the base FC,
and the triangle ABD is equal to the triangle FBC.
[i. 4]
Now the parallelogram BL is double of the triangle ABD,
for they have the same base BD and are in the same parallels
*oBD,AL.

[1.41]

And the square GB is double of the triangle FBC,
for they again have the same base FB and are in the same
parallels FB, GC.
[1. 41]
[But the doubles of equals are equal to one another.]
45
Therefore the parallelogram BL is also equal to the
square GB.
Similarly, if AE, BK be joined,
the parallelogram CL can also be proved equal to the square
HC;

50

therefore the whole square BDEC
is equal to the two
squares GB, HC.
[C. N. 2]
A n d the square BDEC
is described on BC,
and the squares GB, HC on BA, A C.
Therefore the square on the side BC is equal to the
ss squares on the sides BA,
AC.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.
1. the square on, rd a*b...TtTpaywvov,
the word ivaypacpiv or irayfypaptphfov being
understood.
subtending the right angle. Here iTorcwoiaris, "subtending," is used with the
simple accusative [rrjv 6p8r}v yurlav) instead of being followed by 0t6 and the accusative,
which seems to be the original and more orthodox construction. Cf. I. 18, note.
33. the two sides A B , B D . . . . Euclid actually writes "DB, BA," and therefore the
equal sides in the two triangles are not mentioned in corresponding order, though he adheres
to the words Uaripa ixaripa " respectively." Here DB is equal to BC and BA to FB.
44. [But the doubles of equals are equal to one another.] Heiberg brackets
these words as an interpolation, since it quotes a Common Notion which is itself interpolated.
Cf. notes on I. 37, p. 331, and on interpolated Common Notions, pp. 213—4.

" I f we listen," says Proclus (p. 426, 6 sqq.), " t o those who wish to
recount ancient history, we may find some of them referring this theorem to
Pythagoras and saying that he sacrificed an ox in honour of his discovery.
But for my part, while I admire those who first observed the truth of this
theorem, I marvel more at the writer of the Elements, not only because he
made it fast (leaTcSijo-aro) by a most lucid demonstration, but because he
compelled assent to the still more general theorem by the irrefragable
arguments of science in the sixth Book.
For in that Book he proves
generally that, in right-angled triangles, the figure on the side subtending
the right angle is equal to the similar and similarly situated figures described
on the sides about the right angle."

