In addition, Plutarch (in the passages quoted above in the note on 1. 44),
Diogenes Laertius ( v m . 12) and Athenaeus ( x . 13) agree in attributing this
proposition to Pythagoras. It is easy to point out, as does G . Junge ( " W a n n
haben die Griechen das Irrationale entdeckt?" in Novae Symbolae Joachimicae,
Halle a. S., 1907, pp. 221—264), that these are late witnesses, and that the
Greek literature which we possess belonging to the first five centuries after
Pythagoras contains no statement specifying this or any other particular great
geometrical discovery as due to him. Y e t the distich o f Apollodorus the
"calculator," whose date (though it cannot be fixed) is at least earlier than
that of Plutarch and presumably of Cicero, is quite definite as to the existence
of one " famous proposition " discovered by Pythagoras, whatever it was. N o r
does Cicero, in commenting apparently on the verses (De nat. deor. i n . c. 36,
§ 88), seem to dispute the fact of the geometrical discovery, but only the story
of the sacrifice. Junge naturally emphasises the apparent uncertainty in the
statements of Plutarch and Proclus. But, as I read the passages of Plutarch,
I see nothing in them inconsistent with the supposition that Plutarch un­
hesitatingly accepted as discoveries of Pythagoras both the tht-orem o f the
square of the hypotenuse and the problem of the application of an area, and
the only doubt he felt was as to which of the two discoveries was the more
appropriate occasion for the supposed sacrifice. There is also other evidence
not without bearing on the question. T h e theorem is closely connected with
the whole of the matter of Eucl. Book II., in which one of the most prominent
features is the use of the gnomon. N o w the gnomon was a well-understood
term with the Pythagoreans (cf. the fragment of Philolaus quoted on p. 141 o f
Boeckh's Philolaos des Pythagoreers Lehren, 1819). Aristotle also {Physics
in. 4, 203 a 1 0 — 1 5 ) clearly attributes to the Pythagoreans the placing of odd
numbers as gnomons round successive squares beginning with 1, thereby
forming new squares, while in another place (Categ. 14, 15 a 30) the word
gnomon occurs in the same (obviously familiar) sense: " e.g. a square, when a
gnomon is placed round it, is increased in size but is not altered in form."
T h e inference must therefore be that practically the whole doctrine of Book II.
is Pythagorean. Again Heron (? 3rd cent, A . D . ) , like Proclus, credits Pythagoras
with a general rule for forming right-angled triangles with rational whole
numbers for sides. Lastly, the " s u m m a r y " of Proclus appears to credit
Pythagoras with the discovery of the theory, or study, o f irrationals (TT)V tiov
aAdyuiv trpay/iaTtCav). But it is now more or less agreed that the reading here
should be, not twv dkoymv, but twv dvaXoytav, or rather rwv ava Xdyov ( " of
proportionals"), and that the author intended to attribute to Pythagoras a
theory of proportion, i.e. the (arithmetical) theory of proportion applicable
only to commensurable magnitudes, as distinct from the theory o f Eucl.
Book v., which was due to Eudoxus. It is not however disputed that the
Pythagoreans discovered the irrational (cf. the scholium N o . 1 to Book x.).
Now everything goes to show that this discovery o f the irrational was made
with reference to J2, the ratio of the diagonal of a square to its side. It is
clear that this presupposes the knowledge that I. 47 is true of an isosceles
right-angled triangle; and the fact that some triangles of which it had been
discovered to be true were rational right-angled triangles was doubtless
what suggested the inquiry whether the ratio between the lengths o f the
diagonal and the side of a square could also be expressed in whole numbers.
On the whole, therefore, I see no sufficient reason to question the tradition
that, so far as Greek geometry is concerned (the possible priority of the
discovery of the same proposition in India will be considered later), Pythagoras

