35*

BOOK

I

[,.

4 7

was the first to introduce the theorem of i. 47 and to give a general proof
of it.
O n this assumption, how was Pythagoras led to this discovery? It has
been suggested and commonly assumed that the Egyptians were aware that a
triangle with its sides in the ratio 3, 4, 5 was right-angled. Cantor inferred
this from the fact that this was precisely the triangle with which Pythagoras
began, if we may accept the testimony of Vitruvius ( i x . 2) that Pythagoras
taught how to make a right angle by means of three lengths measured by the
numbers 3, 4, 5. I f then he took from the Egyptians the triangle 3, 4, 5, he
presumably learnt its property from them also. N o w the Egyptians must
certainly be credited from a period at least as far back as 2000 B.C. with the
knowledge that 4 + = 5". Cantor finds proof of this in a fragment of
papyrus belonging to the time of the 12th Dynasty newly discovered at
Kahun. In this papyrus we have extractions of square roots : e.g. that of 16
is 4, that of 1^5- is i j , that of
is » § , and the following equations can be
traced:
s

2

3

i

3

+ (f)

2

10'
8'+ 6

2

••('if
a

-- 20 .
i6 + 12
It will be seen that 4* + 3 = 5 can be derived from each of these b y
multiplying, or dividing out, by one and the same factor. W e may therefore
admit that the Egyptians knew that 3* + 4 = 5 - But there seems to be no
evidence that they knew that the triangle (3, 4, 5) is right-angled; indeed,
according to the latest authority (T. Eric Peet, The Rhind Mathematical
Papyrus, 1923), nothing in Egyptian mathematics suggests that the Egyptians
were acquainted with this or any special cases of the Pythagorean theorem.
H o w then did Pythagoras discover the general theorem ? Observing that
3, 4, 5 was a right-angled triangle, while 3 ' + 4 • 5 , he was probably led to
a

s

2

s

2

2

2

2

consider whether a similar relation was true of the sides of right-angled
triangles other than the particular one. T h e simplest case (geometrically) to
investigate was that of the isosceles right-angled triangle; and the truth of the
theorem in this particular case would easily appear from the mere construction
of a figure. Cantor ( i , p. 185) and Allman (Greek Geometry from Thales to
Euclid, p. 29) illustrate by a figure in which the squares are drawn outwards,
as in 1. 47, and divided by diagonals into equal triangles; but I think that the
truth was morejikely to be first observed from a figure of the kind suggested
by Biirk (Das Apastamba-Sulba-Sutra in Zeitschrift der deuts hen morgenldnd.
Gesellschaft, LV., 1901, p. 557) to explain how the Indians arrived at the
same thing. T h e two figures are as shown above. When the geometrical
3

/

