consideration of the figure had shown that the isosceles right-angled triangle
had the property in question, the investigation of the same fact from the
arithmetical point of view would ultimately lead to the other momentous
discovery of the irrationality of the length of the diagonal of a square expressed
in terms of its side.
T h e irrational will come up for discussion later; and our next question
i s : Assuming that Pythagoras had observed the geometrical truth of the
theorem in the case of the two particular triangles, and doubtless of other
rational right-angled triangles, how did he establish it generally ?
There is no positive evidence on this point. T w o possible lines are
however marked out. (1) Tannery says (La GeomStrie grecque, p. 105) that
the geometry of Pythagoras was sufficiently advanced to make it possible
for him to prove the theorem by similar triangles. H e does not say in
what particular manner similar triangles would be used, but their use must
apparently have involved the use of proportions, and, in order that the proof
should be conclusive, of the theory of proportions in its complete form
applicable to incommensurable as well as commensurable magnitudes. N o w
Eudoxus was the first to make the theory of proportion independent of the
hypothesis of commensurability; and as, before Eudoxus' time, this had not
been done, any proof of the general theorem by means of proportions given
by Pythagoras must at least have been inconclusive. But this does not
constitute any objection to the supposition that the truth of the general
theorem may have been discovered in such a manner; on the contrary, the
supposition that Pythagoras proved it by means of an imperfect theory of
proportions would better than anything else account for the fact that Euclid
had to devise an entirely new proof, as Proclus says he did in 1. 47. T h i s
proof had to be independent of the theory of proportion even in its rigorous
form, because the plan of the Elements postponed that theory to Books v.
and v i . , while the Pythagorean theorem was required as early as Book 11.
On the other hand, if the Pythagorean proof had been based on the doctrine
of Books 1. and 11. only, it would scarcely have been necessary for Euclid to
supply a new proof.
T h e possible proofs by means of proportion would seem to be practically
limited to two.
(a) One method is to prove, from the similarity of the triangles ABC,
DBA, that the rectangle CB, BD is equal to the
square on BA, and, from the similarity of the
triangles ABC, DAC, that the rectangle BC, CD
is equal to the square on CA; whence the result
follows by addition.
It will be observed that this proof is in substance
identical with that of Euclid, the only difference
B
D
0
being that the equality of the two smaller squares
to the respective rectangles is inferred by the method of Book v i . instead
of from the relation between the areas of parallelograms and triangles on the
same base and between the same parallels established in Book 1. It occurred
to me whether, if Pythagoras' proof had come, even in substance, so near to
Euclid's, Proclus would have emphasised so much as he does the originality
of Euclid's, or would have gone so far as to say that he marvelled more at
that proof than at the original discovery of the theorem. But on the whole
I see no difficulty; for there can be little doubt that the proof by proportion
is what suggested to Euclid the method of 1. 47, and the transformation of

