BOOK

354

I

the method of proportions into one based on Book i. only, effected by a
construction and proof so extraordinarily ingenious, is a veritable tour de
force which compels admiration, notwithstanding the ignorant strictures of
Schopenhauer, who wanted something as obvious as the second figure in
the case of the isosceles right-angled triangle (p. 352), and accordingly
(Sammtlichr Werke, 111. ยง 39 and 1. ยง 15) calls Euclid's proof " a mouse-trap
proof" and " a proof walking on stilts, nay, a mean, underhand, proof" ( " D e s
Eukleides stelzbeiniger, ja, hinterlistiger Beweis ").
(b) T h e other possible method is this. A s it would be seen that the
triangles into which the original triangle is divided by the perpendicular from
the right angle on the hypotenuse are similar to one another and to the whole
triangle, while in these three triangles the two sides about the right angle in the
original triangle, and the hypotenuse of the original triangle, are corresponding
sides, and that the sum of the two former similar triangles is identically equal
to the similar triangle on the hypotenuse, it might be inferred that the same
would also be true of squares described on the corresponding three sides
respectively, because squares as well as similar triangles are to one another in
the duplicate ratio of corresponding sides. But the same thing is equally true
of any similar rectilineal figures, so that this proof would practically establish
the extended theorem of Eucl. v i . 3 1 , which theorem, however, Proclus
appears to regard as being entirely Euclid's discovery.
O n the whole, the most probable supposition seems to me to be that
Pythagoras used the first method (a) of proof by means of the theory of
proportion as he knew it, i.e. in the defective form which was in use up to the
date of Eudoxus.
(2) I have pointed out the difficulty in the way of the supposition that
Pythagoras' proof depended upon the principles of Eucl. Books 1. and 11. only.

Were it not for this difficulty, the conjecture of Bretschneider (p. 82), followed
by Hankel (p. 98), would be the most tempting hypothesis. According to this
suggestion, we are to suppose a figure like that of Eucl. 11. 4 in which a, b are
the sides of the two inner squares respectively, and a + b is the side of the
complete square. T h e n if the two complements, which are equal, are divided
by their two diagonals into four equal triangles of sides a, b, c, we can place
these triangles round another square of the same size as the whole square, in the
manner shown in the second figure, so that the sides a, b of successive triangles
make up one of the sides of the square and are arranged in cyclic order. It
readily follows that the remainder of the square when the four triangles are
deducted is, in the one case, a square whose side is c, and in the other the sum of
two squares whose sides are a, b respectively. Therefore the.square on c is equal
f

