to the sum of the squares on a, b. A l l that can be said against this con­
jectural proof is that it has no specifically Greek colouring
but rather recalls the Indian method. T h u s Bhaskara
(bom 1 1 1 4 A.D. ; see Cantor, 1,, p. 656) simply draws
four right-angled triangles equal to the original one in­
wards, one on each side of the square on the hypotenuse,
and says " s e e ! " , without even adding that inspection
shows that
^ = 4 ~ + (a-by

= a? + b*.

Though, for the reason given, there is difficulty in supposing that
Pythagoras used a general proof of this kind, which applies of course to rightangled triangles with sides incommensurable as well as commensurable, there
is no objection, I think, to supposing that the truth of the proposition in the
case of the first rational right-angled triangles discovered, e.g. 3, 4, 5, was
proved by a method of this sort. Where the sides are commensurable in this
way, the squares can be divided up into small (unit) squares, which would
much facilitate the comparison between them. That this subdivision was in
fact resorted to in adding and subtracting squares is made probable by
Aristotle's allusion to odd numbers as gnomons placed round unity to form
successive squares in Physics III. 4 ; this must mean that the squares were
represented by dots arranged in the form of a square and a gnomon formed of
dots put round, or that (if the given square was drawn in the usual way) the
gnomon was divided up into unit squares. Zeuthen has shown (" Theorime
de Pylhagore," Origine de la Giomitrie scientifique in Comptes rendus du
II"" Congris international de Philosophic, Geneve, 1904), how easily the
proposition could be proved by a method of this kind for the triangle 3, 4, 5.
T o admit of the two smaller squares being shown side by side, take a square
on a line containing 7 units of length (4 + 3), and divide it up into 49
small squares.
It would be obvious that the
whole square could be exhibited as containing
£

four rectangles of sides 4, 3 cyclically arranged
round the figure with one unit square in the
middle. (This same figure is given by Cantor, i ,
p. 680. to illustrate the method given in the
Chinese " Ch6u-pei".) It would be seen that

A—

3

H

2

(i) the. whole square (f ) is made up of two
squares 3 ' and 4 , and two rectangles 3, 4 ;
J

(ii) the same square is made up of the square
EFGH and the halves of four of the same rect­
angles 3, 4, whence the square EFGH, being equal
to the sum of the squares 3 and 4 , must contain 25 unit squares and its side,
or the diagonal of one of the rectangles, must contain 5 units of length.
D

s

2

Or the result might equally be seen by observing that
(i) the square EFGH on the diagonal of one of the rectangles is made
up of the halves of four rectangles and the unit square in the middle, while
a

2

(ii) the squares 3 and 4 placed at adjacent corners of the large square
make up two rectangles 3, 4 with the unit square in the middle.
T h e procedure would be equally easy for any rational right-angled triangle,
and would be a natural method of trying to prove the property when it had

