356

BOOK

I

[1.47

once been empirically observed that triangles like 3, 4, 5 did in fact contain a
right angle.
Zeuthen has, in the same paper, shown in a most ingenious way how the
property of the triangle 3, 4, 5 could be verified by a sort o f combination of
the second possible method by similar triangles,
(V) on p. 354 above, with subdivision of rectangles
A
into similar small rectangles. I give the method on
account of its interest, although it is no doubt too
advanced to have been used by those who first
proved the property of the particular triangle.
Let ABC be a triangle right-angled at A, and
such that the lengths of the sides AB, AC axe 4 and
3 units respectively.
Draw the perpendicular AD, divide up AB, AC
into unit lengths, complete the rectangle on BC as
base and with AD as altitude, and subdivide this rectangle into small
rectangles by drawing parallels to BC, AD through the points of division of
AB, AC.
Now, since the diagonals of the small rectangles are all equal, each being
of unit length, it follows by similar triangles that the small rectangles are all
equal. A n d the rectangle with AB for diagonal contains 16 of the small
rectangles, while the rectangle with diagonal A C contains 9 of them.
But the sum of the triangles ABD, ADC is equal to the triangle ABC.
Hence the rectangle with BC as diagonal contains 9 + 1 6 or 25 of the
small rectangles;
and therefore BC = 5.
Rational right-angled triangles from the arithmetical stand­
point.
Pythagoras investigated the arithmetical problem of finding rational
numbers which could be made the sides of right-angled triangles, or of finding
square numbers which are the sum of two squares; and herein we find the
beginning of the indeterminate analysis which reached so high a stage of
development in Diophantus. Fortunately Proclus has preserved Pythagoras'
method o f solution in the following passage (pp. 428, 7—429, 8). " Certain
methods for the discovery of triangles of this kind are handed down, one of
which they refer to Plato, and another to Pythagoras. [ T h e latter] starts from
odd numbers. For it makes the odd number the smaller of the sides about
the right a n g l e ; then it takes the square of it, subtracts unity, and makes
half the difference the greater of the sides about the right angle; lastly it adds
unity to this and so forms the remaining side, the hypotenuse. For example,
taking 3, squaring it, and subtracting unity from the 9, the method takes half
of the 8, namely 4 ; then, adding unity to it again, it makes 5, and a rightangled triangle has been found with one side 3, another 4 and another 5. But
the method of Plato argues from even numbers. For it takes the given even
number and makes it one of the sides about the right a n g l e ; then, bisecting
this number and squaring the half, it adds* unity to the square to form the
hypotenuse, and subtracts unity from the square to form the other side about
the right angle. F o r example, taking 4, the method squares half of this, or
2, and so makes 4 ; then, subtracting unity; it produces 3, and adding unity
it produces 5. T h u s it has formed the same triangle as that which was
obtained by the other method."

