
In order that a and a + i may be integral, « must be odd, and we have at
once the Pythagorean formula

I think Treutlein's hypothesis is shown to be the correct one by the passage
in Aristotle's Physics already quoted, where the reference is undoubtedly to the
Pythagoreans, and odd numbers are clearly identified with gnomons " placed
round i . " But the ancient commentaries on the passage make the matter
clearer still. Philoponus says: " A s a proof... the Pythagoreans refer to what
12
J '

happens with the addition of numbers; for when the odd numbers are
successively added to a square number they keep it square and equilateral....
Odd numbers are accordingly called gnomons because, when added to what are
already squares, they preserve the square form....Alexander has excellently
said in explanation that the phrase ' when gnomons are placed round' means
making a figure with the odd numbers (TT/V xara TOW ir«piTToi>s doitf/nous
trxinuiToypoApiav)...for it is the practice with the Pythagoreans to represent
things infigures(a\y]iuiToypa<pfiv).
T h e next question i s : assuming this explanation of the Pythagorean
formula, what are we to say of the origin of Plato's ? It could of course be
obtained as a particular case of the general formula of Eucl. x. already
referred t o ; but there are two simple alternative explanations in this case also,
( i ) Bretschneider observes that, to obtain Plato's formula, we have only to
double the sides of the squares in the Pythagorean formula,
for
(2«)» + ( « • - ! ) • = («• + if,
where however n is not necessarily odd.
(2) Treutlein would explain by means of an extension of the gnomon idea.
As, he says, the Pythagorean formula was obtained by placing a gnomon
consisting of a single row of dots round two adjacent sides of a square, it
would be natural to try whether another solution could not
be found by placing round the square a gnomon consisting of
a double row of dots. Such a gnomon would equally turn the
I \
square into a larger square; and the question would be
. . . . .
whether the double-row gnomon itself could be a square. If
• • ! . . .
the side of the original square was a, it would easily be seen
that the number of units in the double-row gnomon would be 4« + 4, and we
have only to put
4<r + 4 = 4/;",
n


