whence

a=

n*-i,

a + 2 = n* + i,
and we have the Platonic formula
(2*)" + (»• - if =
I think this is, in substance, the right explanation, but, in form, not quite
correct.
T h e Greeks would not, I think, have
treated the double row as a gnomon. Their com­
parison would have been between ( i ) a certain
square plus a single-row gnomon and (2) the same
square minus a single-row gnomon.
A s the
• • • • • • • • • •
application of Eucl. II. 4 to the case where the
•••'•»»••••»
segments of the side of the square are a, 1 enables
the Pythagorean formula to be obtained as
Treutlein obtains it, so I think that Eucl. II. 8
* * * * * * * -^1 * *
confirms the idea that the Platonic formula was
. . . . . . . . J.
obtained by comparing a square plus a gnomon
with the same square minus a gnomon. For 11. 8 proves that
40b + (a- b)* = (a + b)'
whence, substituting 1 for b, we have
t

4a + (a — 1)* = (a + 1)',
3

and we have only to put a = n to obtain Plato's formula.
T h e " t h e o r e m of P y t h a g o r a s " in India.
This question has been discussed anew in the last few years as_the result
of the publication of two important papers by Albert Biirk on Das ApastambaSulba-Sutra in the Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenldndischen Gesellschaft
(in., 1901, pp. 543—591, and LVI., 1902, pp. 327—391). T h e first of
the two papers contains the introduction and the text, the second the
translation with notes. A selection of the most important parts of the
material was made and issued by G . Thibaut in the Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal, xi.iv., 1 8 7 5 , Part 1. (reprinted also at Calcutta, 1875,
as The Sulvasutras, by G . Thibaut). Thibaut in this work gave a most
valuable comparison of extracts from the three Sulvasutras by Baudhayana,
Apastamba and Katyayana respectively, with a running commentary and an
estimate of the date and originality of the geometry of the Indians. Biirk
has however done good service by making the Apastamba-S.-S. accessible in
its entirety and investigating the whole subject afresh. With the natural
enthusiasm of an editor for the work he is editing, he roundly maintains, not
only that the Pythagorean theorem was known and proved in all its generality
by the Indians long before the date of Pythagoras (about 580—500 B . C ) , but
that they had also discovered the irrational; and further that, so far from
Indian geometry being indebted to the Greek, the much-travelled Pythagoras
probably obtained his theory from India (loc. tit. LV., p. 575 note). Three impor­
tant notices and criticisms of Biirk's work have followed, by H . G. Zeuthen
(" Thiorime de Pythagore," Origine de la Geometric scientifique, 1904, already
quoted), by Moritz Cantor ( Vber die alteste indische Mathematik in the Archiv
der Mathematik und Physik, v n i . , 1905, pp. 63—72) and by Heinrich Vogt
(Haben die alten Inder den Pythagoreischen Lehrsatz und das Irrationale
gekanntl in the Bibliotheca Mathematica, v n „ 1906, pp. 6—23. See also
Cantor's Geschichte der Mathematik, i „ pp. 635—645.

