A square.on length of 2 i units gives 6} unit squares
„
„
i unit gives 1 unit square

i

»

T

>,

(in. 8)
(in. I O )
(»••

I

0

)

(f) Generally, the square on any length contains as many rows (of
small, unit, squares) as the length contains units.
( m . 7)
(8)

Constructions, by means of the Pythagorean theorem, of
(a) the sum of two squares as one square,
(b) the difference of two squares as one square.

(if. 4)
(11. 5)

(9) A transformation of a rectangle into a square.
(11. 7)
[This is not directly done as by Euclid in II. 14, but the rectangle is first
transformed into a gnomon, i.e. into the difference
between two squares, which difference is then trans„
„
formed into one square by the preceding rule. If
H
ABCD be the given rectangle of which BC is the
longer side, cut off the square A BEE, bisect the
F
rectangle DE left over by HG parallel to EE, move
the upper half DG and place it on AF as base in the
position AK. Then the rectangle ABCD is equal to
the gnomon which is the difference between the square
LB and the square LF. In other words, Apastamba
transforms the rectangle ab into the difference between
>
g
ar

the squares

>d (~^~)

J

(10) A n attempt at a transformation of a square (a') into a rectangle
which shall have one side of given length (/>).
( m . 1)
[This shows no sign o f such a procedure as that of Eucl. 1. 44, and indeed
does no more than say that we must subtract ab from a' and then adapt the
remainder a -ab so that it may " f i t o n " to the rectangle ab. T h e problem
is therefore only reduced to another of the same kind, and presumably it was
only solved arithmetically in the case where a, b are given numerically. T h e
Indian was therefore far from the general, geometrical, solution.]
2

(11)

Increase of a given square into a larger square.

(111. 9)

[This amounts to saying that you must add two rectangles (a, b) and
another square (b*) in order to transform a square a* into a square (a + b)\
T h e formula is therefore that of Eucl. 11. 4, a' + 217* + b' = (a + i j ' . l
T h e first important question in relation to the above is that o f date.
Biirk assigns to the Apastamba-Sulba-Sutra a date at least as early as the 5th
or 4th century B.C. H e observes however (what is likely enough) that the
matter o f it must have been much older than the book itself. Further, as
regards one of the constructions for right angles, that by means of cords of
lengths 1 5 , 36, 39, he shows that it was known at the time of the TaittirlyaSamhita and the Satapatha-Brahmana, still older works belonging to the
8th century B.C. at latest. It may be that (as Biirk maintains) the discovery
that triangles with sides (a, b, c) in rational numbers such that a' + V = <? are
right-angled was nowhere made so early as in India. W e find however in two
ancient Chinese treatises ( 1 ) a statement that the diagonal of the rectangle
(3, 4) is 5 and (2) a rule for finding the hypotenuse of a " right triangle " from
the sides, while tradition connects both works with the name of Chou K u n g

