who died 1105 B . C ( D . E. Smith, History of Mathematics, 1. pp. 30—33, it.
p. 288).
As regards the various " rational rectangles " used by Apastamba, it is to
be observed that two of the seven, viz. 8, 1 5 , 17 and 12, 35, 37, d o not belong
to the Pythagorean series, the others consist of two which belong to it, viz. 3,
4, 5 and 5, 12, 13, and multiples of these. It is true, as remarked by
Zeuthen (of. tit. p. 842), that the rules of n. 7 and m . 9, numbered (9) and
( 1 1 ) above respectively, would furnish the means of finding any number of
"rational rectangles." But it would not appear that the Indians had been
able to formulate any general rule; otherwise their list of such rectangles
would hardly have been so meagre. Apastamba mentions seven only, really
reducible to four (though one other, 7, 24, 25, appears in the Baudhayana&.-S., supposed to be older than Apastamba). T h e s e are all that Apastamba
knew of, for he adds (v. 6 ) : " S o many recognisable (erkennbare) constructions
are there," implying that he knew of no other "rational rectangles" that could
be employed. But the words also imply that the theorem of the square on
the diagonal is also true of other rectangles not of the " recognisable " kind,
i.e. rectangles in which the sides and the diagonal are not in the ratio of
integers; this is indeed implied by the constructions for J 2, ^ 3 etc. up to J6
(cf. 11. 2, V I I I . s). This is all that can be said. T h e theorem is, it is true,
enunciated as a general proposition, but there is no sign of anything like a
general proof; there is nothing to show thai the assumption of its universal
truth was founded on anything better than an imperfect induction from a
certain number of cases, discovered empirically, of triangles with side's in the
ratio of whole numbers in which the property (1) that the square on the
longest side is equal to the sum of the squares on the other two sides was
found to be always accompanied by the property (2) that the latter two sides
include a right angle.
It remains to consider Biirk's claim that the Indians had discovered the
irrational. This is based upon the approximate value of ^ 2 given by
Apastamba in his rule 1. 6 numbered (4) above. There is nothing to show
how this was arrived at, but Thibaut's suggestion certainly seems the best and
tnost natural. T h e Indians may have observed that 1 7 * = 289 is nearly
double of 12* = 144. If so, the next question which would naturally occur to
them would be, by how much the side 17 must be diminished in order that
the square on it may be 288 exactly. If, in accordance with the Indian
fashion, a gnomon with unit area were to be subtracted from a square with
17 as side, this would approximately be secured by giving the gnomon the
breadth ^j, for 2 x 1 7 x ^ = 1 .
T h e side of the smaller square thus arrived
at would be 1 7 - ^ = 1 2 + 4 + 1 - ^ , whence, dividing out by 12, we have
, approximately.
But it is a far cry from this calculation of an approximate value to the
discovery of the irrational. First, we ask, is there any sign that this value
was known to be inexact? It comes directly after the statement (1. 6) that
the square on the diagonal of a square is double of that square, and the rule is
quite boldly stated without any qualification : " lengthen the unit by one-third
and the latter by one-quarter of itself less one-thirty-fourth of this part."
Further, the approximate value is actually used for the purpose of constructing
a square when the side is given (11. 1). So familiar was the formula that it
was apparently made the basis of a sub-division of measures of length.

