Thibaut observes (Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, X L I X . , p. 241) that,
according to Baudhayana, the unit of length was divided into 12 fingerbrcadths,
and that one of two divisions of thefingefbreadthwas into 34 sesame-corns, and
he adds that he has no doubt that this division, which he has not elsewhere
met, owes its origin to the formula for J2. T h e result of using this sub­
division would be that, in a square with side equal to 12fingerbrcadths,the
diagonal would be 17fingerbrcadthsless 1 sesame-corn. Is it conceivable that
a sub-division of a measure of length would be based on an evaluation known
to be inexact? N o doubt the first discoverer would be aware that the area of
a gnomon with breadth ' and outer side 17 is not exactly equal to 1 but less
than it by the square of
or by TTVO ,
* therefore that, in taking that
gnomon as the proper area to be subtracted from 1 7 ' , he was leaving out of
account the small fraction
y * - ; as, however, the object of the whole
proceeding was purely practical, he would, without hesitation, ignore this as
being of no practical importance, and, thereafter, the formula would be
handed down and taken as a matter of course without arousing suspicion as
to its accuracy. This supposition is confirmed by reference to the sort of
rules which the Indians allowed themselves to regard as accurate. Thus
Apastamba himself gives a construction for a circle equal in area to a given
square, which is equivalent to taking IT = 3 0 9 , and yet observes that it gives the
required circle " exactly " ( i n . 2), while his construction of a square equal to
a circle, which he equally calls " e x a c t , " makes the side of the square equal
to x^ths of the diameter of the circle ( i l l . 3), and is equivalent to taking
w = 3-004. But, even if some who used the approximation for ^ 2 were
conscious that it was not quite accurate (of which there is no evidence), there
is an immeasurable difference between arrival at this consciousness and the
discovery of the irrational. A s Vogt says, three stages had to be passed
through before the irrationality of the diagonal of a square was discovered in
any real sense. (1) A l l values found by direct measurement or calculations
based thereon have to be recognised as being inaccurate. Next (2) must
supervene the conviction that it is impossible to arrive at an accurate arithmetical
expression of the value. A n d lastly (3) the impossibility must be proved.
N o w there is no real evidence that the Indians, at the date in question, had
even reached the first stage, still less the second or third.
S

T

-

a n <

T x

T h e net results then of Biirk's papers and of the criticisms to which they
have given rise appear to be these. (1) It must be admitted that Indian
geometry had reached the stage at which we find it in Apastamba quite
independently of Greek influence. But (2) the old Indian geometry was
purely empirical and practical, far removed from abstractions such as the
irrational. T h e Indians had indeed, by-trial in particular cases, persuaded
themselves of the truth of the Pythagorean theorem and enunciated it in all
its generality; but they had not established it by scientific proof.
A l t e r n a t i v e proofs.
I. T h e well-known proof of 1. 47 obtained by putting two squares side
by side, with their bases continuous, and cutting off right-angled triangles
which can then be put on again in different positions, is attributed by
an-Nairizi to Thabit b. Qurra (826—901 A . D . ) .
His actual construction proceeds thus.
L e t ABC be the given triangle right-angled at A.
Construct on AB the square AD;
produce ACto Fso that EF may be equal to AC.

