P R O P O S I T I O N 47
Construct on EE the square EG, and produce DH to K so that DK
may be equal to AC.
It is then proved that, in the triangles
BAC, CFG, KHG, BDK,
the sides BA, CF, KH, BD are all equal,
and
the sides AC, FG, HG, DKare all equal.
T h e angles included by the equal sides
are all right angles; hence the four triangles
are equal in all respects.
[i. 4]
Hence BC, CG, GK, KB are all equal.
Further the angles DBK, ABC are equal;
hence, if we add to each the angle DBC,
the angle KBC is equal to the angle ABD
and is therefore a right angle.
In the same way the angle CGK is right;
therefore BCGK is a square, i.e. the square on BC.
Now the sum of the quadrilateral GCLH and the triangle LDB together
with two of the equal triangles make the squares on AB, AC, and together
with the other two make the square on BC.
Therefore etc.
I I . Another proof is easily arrived at by taking the particular case of
Pappus' more general proposition given below in which the given triangle
is right-angled and the parallelograms on the sides containing the right angles
are squares. I f the figure is drawn, it will be seen that, with no more than
one additional line inserted, it contains Thabit's figure, so that Thabit's proof
may have been practically derived from that of Pappus.
III. T h e most interesting of the remaining proofs seems to be that
shown in the accompanying figure.
It is given by J. W. Miiller, SystemaK
I.
tischt Zusammenstellung der wichtigsten
Usher bekanntcn Btweise des Pythag.
Lehrsatzes (Nurnberg, 1819), and in
the second edition (Mainz, 1821) of
Ign. Hoffmann, Der Pythag. Lehrsatz mit 32 theils bekannten theils
neuen Beweisen [3 more in second
edition]. It appears to come from
one of the scientific papers of Leon­
B
ardo da Vinci ( 1 4 5 2 — 1 5 1 9 ) .
T h e triangle HKL is constructed
on the base KH with the side KL
equal to BC and the side LH equal
to AB.
Then the triangle HLK is equal in all respects to the triangle ABC,
and to the triangle EBF.
Now DB, BG, which bisect the angles ABE, CBF respectively, are
in a straight line. Join BL.
It is easily proved that the four quadrilaterals ADGC, EDGE,
ABLK,
HLBC are all equal.

