of course refer to the extension of 1. 47 given by Pappus; but the key to
them, so far as Heron is concerned, is to be found in the commentary of
an-Nairizi (pp. 1 7 5 — 1 8 5 , ed. Besthorn-Heiberg; pp. 78—84, ed. Curtze) on
1. 47, wherein he gives Heron's proof that the lines AL, EC, BK in Euclid's
figure meet in a point. Heron proved this by means of three lemmas which
would most naturally be proved from the principle of similitude as laid down
in Book Vi., but which Heron, as a tour de force, proved on the principles of
Book 1. only. T h e first lemma is to the following effect.
If, in a triangle A B C , D E be drawn parallel to the base B C , and if A F be
drawn from the vertex A to the middle point F of B C , then A F will also
bisect D E .
This is proved by drawing HK through A parallel
Q'
to DE or BC, and HDL, KEM through D, E reV " T " / °
spectively parallel to A GF, and lastly joining DE, EF.
\ ,'
Then the triangles ABE, AFC are equal (being
on equal bases), and the triangles DBF, EEC are also
equal (being on equal bases and between the same
parallels).
Therefore, by subtraction, the triangles ADE, AEF
B L
M~~C
are equal, and hence the parallelograms AL, AM are
equal
These parallelograms are between the same parallels LM, HK; therefore
LF, EM are equal, whence DG, GE are also equal.
T h e second lemma is an extension of this to the case where DE meets
BA, CA produced beyond A.
T h e third lemma proves the converse of Euclid 1. 43, that, If a paral­
lelogram A B is cut into four others A D G E , D F , F G C B , C E , so that D F ,
C E are equal, the common vertex G will be on the diagonal A B .
Heron produces A G till it meets CF in H. Then, if we join HB, we
have to prove that AHB is one straight line. T h e
proof is as follows. Since the areas DF, EC are
equal, the triangles DGE, ECG are equal.
If we add to each the triangle GCF,
the triangles ECF, DCF are e q u a l ;
therefore ED, CF are parallel.
Now it follows from 1. 34, 29 and 26 that the
triangles AKE, GKD are equal in all respects;
therefore EK is equal to KD.
Hence, by the second lemma,
CH is equal to HE.
Therefore, in the triangles FHB, CHG,
the two sides BF, EH are equal to the two sides GC, CH,
and the angle BFH is equal to the angle GCH;
hence the triangles are equal in all respects,
and the angle BHF is equal to the angle GHC.
Adding to each the angle GHF, we find that the angles BHF, FHG are
equal to the angles CHG, GHF,
and therefore to two right angles.
Therefore AHB is a straight line.

