But CE was also proved equal to HE;
therefore the whole square AE is equal to the gnomon MNO.
And, since BA is double of AD,
the square on BA is quadruple of the square on AD,
that is, AE is quadruple of DH.
But AE is equal to the gnomon MNO;
therefore the gnomon MNO is also quadruple of AP;
therefore the whole DF is five times AP.
And DF is the square on DC, and AP the square on DA;
therefore the square on CD is five times the square on DA.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.


The first five propositions are in the nature of lemmas, which are required
for later propositions but are not in themselves of much importance.
It will be observed that, while the method of the propositions is that of
Book ii., being strictly geometrical and not algebraical, none of the results of
that Book are made use of (except indeed in the Lemma to xm. 2, which is
probably not genuine). It would therefore appear as though these propositions
were taken from an earlier treatise without being revised or rewritten in the
light of Book 11. It will be remembered that, according to Proclus (p. 67, 6),
Eudoxus " greatly added to the number of the theorems which originated with
Plato regarding the section " (i.e. presumably the "golden section "); and it is
therefore probable that the five theorems are due to Eudoxus.
That, if AB is divided at C in extreme and mean ratio, the rectangle
AB, BC is equal to the square on AC is inferred from vi. 17.
AD is made equal to half AB, and we have to prove that
(sq. on CD) = 5 (sq. on AD).
The figure shows at once that
£ 7 CB = £ 7 HL,

so that

CJ CH+ CD HL = 2 (CJ CH)
= CJAG.
Also
sq. HF= (sq. on AC)
= rect. AB, BC
= CE.

By addition,
(gnomon MNO) = sq. on AB
= 4 (sq. on AD);
whence, adding the sq. on AD to each, we have
(sq. on CD) = 5 (sq. on AD).
The result here, and in the next propositions,
is really seen more readily by means of the figure
of 11. 1 1 .
In this figure SR = AC+\AB,
by construction;
and we have therefore to prove that
(sq. on SB) = 5 (sq. on AB).


