BOOK XIII

44*

[xm.

I

This is obvious, for
(sq. on SB) = (sq. on BB)
- sum of sqs. on AB, AB
= S (sq. on AB).
The MSS. contain a curious addition to xm. i—5 in the shape of analyses
and syntheses for each proposition prefaced by the heading:
" What is analysis and what is synthesis.
" Analysis is the assumption of that which is sought as if it were admitted
<and the arrival > by means of its consequences at something admitted to
be true.
"Synthesis is an assumption of that which is admitted <and the arrival>
by means of its consequences at something admitted to be true."
There must apparently be some corruption in the text; it does not, in the
case of synthesis, give what is wanted. B and V have, instead of " something
admitted to be true," the words " the end or attainment of what is sought."
The whole of this addition is evidently interpolated. To begin with, the
analyses and syntheses of the five propositions are placed all together in four
MSS. ; in P, q they come after an alternative proof of xm. 5 (which alternative
proof P gives after xm. 6, while q gives it instead of xm. 6), in B (which has
not the alternative proof of xm. 5) after xm. 6, and in b (in which xm. 6 is
wanting, and the alternative proof of xm. 5 is in the margin, in the first hand)
after XIII. 5, while V has the analyses of 1—3 in the text after xm. 6 and
those of 4—5 in the same place in the margin, by the second hand-. Further,
the addition is altogether alien from the plan and manner of the Elements.
The interpolation took place before Theon's time, and the probability is that
it was originally in the margin, whence it crept into the text of P after xm. 5.
Heiberg (after Bretschneider) suggested in his edition (Vol. v. p. lxxxiv.) that
it might be a relic of analytical investigations by Theaetetus or Eudoxus, and
he cited the remark of Pappus (v. p. 410) at the beginning of his
" comparisons of the five [regular solid] figures which have an equal surface,"
to the effect that he will not use "the so-called analytical investigation by
means of which some of the ancients effected their demonstrations." More
recently (Paralipomena zu Euklid in Hermes xxxvm., 1903) Heiberg con­
jectures that the author is Heron, on the ground that the sort of analysis and
synthesis recalls Heron's remarks on analysis and synthesis in his commentary
on the beginning of Book 11. (quoted by an-Nairizi, ed. Curtze, p. 89) and his
quasi-algebraical alternative proofs of propositions in that Book.
To show the character of the interpolated matter I need only give the
analysis and synthesis of one proposition. In the case of xm. 1 it is in
substance as follows. The figure is a mere
straight line.
D
A
C
B
Let AB be divided in extreme and mean
1
ratio at C, AC being the greater segment;
and let
AD=\AB.
I say that
(sq. on CD) = 5 (sq. on AD).
(Analysis.)
"For, since
(sq. on CD) = 5 (sq. on AD)"
and
(sq. on CD) = (sq. on CA) + (sq. on AD) + 2 (rect. CA, AD),
therefore
(sq. on CA) + 2 (rect. CA, AD) = 4 (sq. on AD).
But
rect. BA.AC=2 (rect. CA. AD),
and
(sq. on CA) = (rect. AB, BC).
1

1

1

