xm. 6, 7]

PROPOSITIONS 6, 7

And CA was also proved to be an apotome.
Therefore etc.
It seems certain that this proposition is an interpolation. P has it, but the
copyist (or rather the copyist of its archetype) says that " this theorem is not
found in most copies of the new recension, but is found in those of the old."
In the first place, there is a scholium to xm. 17 in P itself which proves the
same thing as xm. 6, and which would therefore have been useless if XIII. 6
had preceded. Hence, when the scholium was written, this proposition had
not yet been interpolated. Secondly, P has it before the alternative proof of
xm. 5 ; this proof is considered, on general grounds, to be interpolated, and
it would appear that it must have been a later interpolation (xm. 6) which
divorced it from the proposition to which it belonged. Thirdly, there is cause
for suspicion in the proposition itself, for, while the enunciation states that
each segment of the straight line is an apotome, the proposition adds that the
lesser segment is a first apotome. The scholium in P referred to has not this
blot. What is actually wanted in xm. 17 is the fact that the greater segment
is an apotome. It is probable that Euclid assumed this fact as evident enough
from xm. 1 without further proof, and that he neither wrote xm. 6 nor the
quotation of its enunciation in xm. 17.

PROPOSITION 

7.

If three angles of an equilateral pentagon, taken either in
order or not in order, be equal, the pentagon zvill be equiangular.
For in the equilateral pentagon A BCDE let, first, three
angles taken in order, those at A, B, C,
be equal to one another;
A
I say that the pentagon A BCDE is
equiangular.
For let AC, BE, FD be joined.
Now, since the two sides CB, BA
are equal to the two sides BA,
AE
respectively,
and the angle CBA is equal to the
o
0
angle BAE,
therefore the base AC is equal to the base BE,
the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle ABE,
and the remaining angles will be equal to the remaining angles,
namely those which the equal sides subtend,
[1. 4]
that is, the angle BCA to the angle BEA, and the angle
ABE

to the angle

hence the side AFis

CAB;
also equal to the side BE.

[1. 6]


