I say next that the side of the icosahedron is the irrational
straight line called minor.
For, since the diameter of the sphere is rational,
and the square on it is five times the square on the radius
of the circle EFGHK,
therefore the radius of the circle EFGHK is also rational ;
hence its diameter is also rational.
But, if an equilateral pentagon be inscribed in a circle
which has its diameter rational, the side of the pentagon is
the irrational straight line called minor.
[xm. n ]
A n d the side of the pentagon EFGHK is the side of the
icosahedron.
Therefore the side of the icosahedron is the irrational
straight line called minor.
PORISM. From this it is manifest that the square on the
diameter of the sphere is five times the square on the radius
of the circle from which the icosahedron has been described,
and that the diameter of the sphere is composed of the side
of the hexagon and two of the sides of the decagon inscribed
in the same circle.
Q. E. D.


Euclid's method is
(1) to find the pentagons in the two parallel circular sections of the sphere,
the sides of which form ten (five in each circle) of the edges of the icosahedron,
(2) to find the two points which are the poles of the two circular sections,
(3) to prove that the triangles formed by joining the angular points of the
pentagons which are nearest to one another two and two are equilateral,
(4) to prove that the triangles of which the poles are the vertices and the
sides of the pentagons the bases are also equilateral,
(5) that all the angular points Other than the poles lie on a sphere the
diameter of which is the straight line joining the poles,
(6) that this sphere is of the same size as the given sphere,
(7) that, if the diameter of the sphere is rational, the edge of the icosahedron
is the minor irrational straight line.
I have drawn another figure which will perhaps show the pentagons, and
the position of the poles with regard to them, more clearly than does Euclid's
figure.
(1) If AB is the diameter of the given sphere, divide AB at C so that
AC=\CB;
draw CD at right angles to AB meeting the semicircle on AB in D.
Join

BD.


