And, since the diameter of the sphere is rational,
and the square on it is triple of the square on the side of the
cube,
therefore NO, being a side of the cube, is rational.
[But if a rational line be cut in extreme and mean ratio,
each of the segments is an irrational apotome.]
Therefore UV, being a side of the dodecahedron, is an
irrational apotome.
[xm. 6]
PORISM. From this it is manifest that, when the side of
the cube is cut in extreme and mean ratio, the greater segment
is the side of the dodecahedron.
Q. E. D.


In this proposition we find Euclid using two propositions which precede
but are used nowhere else, notably vi. 32, which some authors, in consequence
of their having overlooked its use here, have been hard put to it to explain.
Euclid's construction in this case is really identical with that given by
Mr H. M. Taylor, and also referred to by Henrici and Treutlein under " crystalformation."
Euclid starts from the cube inscribed in a sphere, as in xm. 15, and then
finds the side of the regular pentagon in which the side of the cube is a
diagonal.
Mr Taylor takes / to be the diagonal of a regular pentagon of side a,
so that, by Ptolemy's theorem,
l* = at+a',
constructs a cube of wnich / is the edge, and gets the side of the pentagon
by drawing ZX from Z, the centre of the cube, perpendicular to the face BF
and equal to J (/+ a), then drawing UV through X parallel to BC, and
making UX, XV both equal to \a.
Euclid finds UVtims.
Draw NO, MH bisecting pairs of opposite sides in the square BF and
meeting in P.
Draw GK, HL bisecting pairs of opposite sides in the square BD and
meeting in Q.
Divide PN, PO, QH respectively in extreme and mean ratio at R, S, T
(PB, PS, QT being the greater segments); draw BU, SV, TW outwards
perpendicular to the respective faces of the cube, and all equal in length
to PB, PS, TQ.
Join BU, UV, VC, CW, WB.
Then BUVCW is one of the pentagonalfaces of the dodecahedron;
and the others can be constructed in the same way.
Euclid now proves
(1) that the pentagon BUVCW is equilateral,
(2) that it is in one plane,
(3) that it is equiangular,


