And, since, as A is to B, so is C to D,
and of A, C equimultiples K, L have been taken,
and of B, D other, chance, equimultiples M, N,
therefore, if K is in excess of M, L also is in excess of N,
if it is equal, equal, and if less, less.
[v. Def. 5]
And K, L are equimultiples of E, F,
and M, N other, chance, equimultiples of G, H;
therefore, as E is to G, so is Fto H.
[v. Def. 5]
Therefore etc.

Q. E. D.

This proposition shows that, if a, b, c, d are proportionals, then
ma is to nb as mc is to nd;
and the proof is as follows :
Take pma, pmc any equimultiples of ma, mc, and qnb, qnd any equimulti­
ples of nb, nd.
Since a : b = c : d, it follows [v. Def. 5] that,
according as pma > = < qnb, pmc > = < qnd.
But the / - and (/-equimultiples are any equimultiples;
therefore [v. Def. 5]
ma : nb = mc : nd.
It will be observed that Euclid's phrase for taking any equimultiples of
A, C and any other equimultiples of B, D is " let there be taken equimulti­
ples E, F of A, C, and G, H other, chance, equimultiples of B, £>," E, F
being called UTUKK TroAAairAdo-ia simply, and G, H aWa, a irv\tv, UTOKVS
TroWairkda-ia. And similarly, when any equimultiples (K, L) of E, F
come to be taken, and any other equimultiples (M, N) of G, H.
But
later on Euclid uses the same phrases about the neiv equimultiples with
reference to the original magnitudes, reciting that " there have been taken, of
A, C, equimultiples K, L and of B, D, other, chance, equimultiples M, N";
whereas M, N are not any equimultiples whatever of B, D, but are any
equimultiples of the particular multiples (G, H) which have been taken of B,
D respectively, though these latter have been taken at random. Simson would,
in the first place, add 0 hvyiv in the passages where any equimultiples E, F
are taken of A, C and any equimultiples K, L are taken of E, F, because the
words are " wholly necessary" and, in the second place, would leave them
out where M, N are called aWa, a irvxtv, to-dxts TroAXarrXdcria of B, D, because
it is not true that of B, D have been taken " any equimultiples whatever (<t
ITVX<), M, N." Simson adds: "And it is strange that neither Mr Briggs, who
did right to leave out these words in one place of Prop. 13 of this book, nor
Dr Gregory, who changed them into the word ' some' in three places, and
left them out in a fourth of that same Prop. 13, did not also leave them out
in this place of Prop. 4 and in the second of the two places where they occur
in Prop. 17 of this book, in neither of which they can stand consistent with
truth : And in none of all these places, even in those which they corrected in
their Latin translation, have they cancelled the words d irvxi in the Greek
text, as they ought to have done. T h e same words d ITVX' are found in


