four places of Prop. 11 of this book, in the first and last of which they are
necessary, but in the second and third, though they are true, they are quite
superfluous; as they likewise are in the second of the two places in which
they are found in the 12th prop, and in the like places of Prop. 22, 23 of this
book; but are wanting in the last place of Prop. 23, as also in Prop. 25,
Book xi."
As will be seen, Simson's emendations amount to alterations of the text
so considerable as to suggest doubt whether we should be justified in making
them in the absence of MS. authority. T h e phrase " equimultiples of A, C
and other, chance, equimultiples of B, D " recurs so constantly as to suggest
that it was for Euclid a quasi-stereotyped phrase, and that it is equally genuine
wherever it occurs. Is it then absolutely necessary to insert d ITU^C in places
where it does not occur, and to leave it out in the places where Simson holds
it to be wrong ? I think the text can be defended as it stands. In the first
place to say "take equimultiples of A, C" is a fair enough way of saying
take any equimultiples whatever of A, C. The other difficulty is greater, but
may, 1 think, be only due to the adoption of any whateiier as the translation
of d Jfrux*- As a matter of fact, the words only mean chance equimultiples,
equimultiples which are the result of random selection. Is it not justifiable
to describe the product of two chance numbers, numbers selected at random,
as being a " chance number," since it is the result of two random selections ?
I think so, and I have translated d irv^t. accordingly as implying, in the case
in question, " other equimultiples whatever they may happen to be."
T o this proposition Theon added the following:
" Since then it was proved that, if K is in excess of M, L is also in excess
of N, if it is equal, (the other is) equal, and if less, less,
it is clear also that,
if M is in excess of A", N is also in excess of Z, if it is equal, (the other is)
equal, and if less, less;
and for this reason,
as G is to E, so also is H to F.
PORISM. From this it is manifest that, if four magnitudes be proportional,
they will also be proportional inversely."
Simson rightly pointed out that the demonstration of what Theon intended
to prove, viz. that, if £, G, F, H be proportionals, they are proportional
inversely, i.e. G is to E as H is to F, does not in the least depend upon this
4th proposition or the proof of it; for, when it is said that, " if K exceeds M,
L also exceeds N etc.," this is not proved from the fact that E, G, F, / / a r e
proportionals (which is the conclusion of Prop. 4), but from the fact that
A, B, C, D are proportionals.
T h e proposition that, if A, B, C, D are proportionals, they are also
proportionals inversely is not given by Euclid, but Simson supplies the proof
in his Prop. B . T h e fact is really obvious at once from the 5th definition
of Book v. (cf. p. 127 above), and Euclid probably omitted the proposition
as unnecessary.
Simson added, in place of Theon's corollary, the following:
" Likewise, if the first has the same ratio to the second which the third
has to the fourth, then also any equimultiples whatever of the first and third
have the same ratio to the second and fourth: And, in like manner, the first
and the third have the same ratio to any equimultiples whatever of the second
and fourth."

