And, since AE

is the same multiple of CF that EB

is of

GC,
and GC is equal to DF,
»S therefore AE is the same multiple of CF that EB is of FD.
But, by hypothesis,
AE is the same multiple of CF that
is of CD ;
therefore EB is the same multiple of FD that AB is of CD.
That is, the remainder EB will be the same multiple of
30 the remainder FD that the whole AB is of the whole CZ>.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.

ytyoyiru

10. let E B be m a d e t h a t multiple OF CG, ROIRAVRAIRXAVIOR
koX to EB TOO
TO. From this way of stating the construction one might suppose that CG was given and
EB had to be found equal to a certain multiple of it. But in fact EB is what is given and
CG has to be found, i.e. CG has to be constructed as a certain rwfaiultiple of EB.
This proposition corresponds to v. 1, with subtraction taking the place of
addition. It proves the formula
ma — mb = m(a — b).
Euclid's construction assumes that, if AE is any multiple of CF, and EB
is any other magnitude, a fourth straight line can be found such that EB is
the same multiple of it that AE is of CF, or in other words that, given any
magnitude, we can divide it into any number of equal parts. This is however
not proved, even of straight lines, much less other magnitudes, until vi. 9 .
Peletarius had already seen this objection to the construction. The difficulty
is not got over by regarding it merely as a hypothetical construction; for
hypothetical constructions are not in Euclid's manner. T h e remedy is to
substitute the alternative construction given by Simson, after Peletarius and
Campanus' translation from the Arabic, which only requires us to add a
magnitude to itself a certain number of times. T h e demonstration follows
Euclid's line exactly.
" Take A G the same multiple of FD that AE is of CF;
G
therefore AE is the same multiple of CF'that EG is of CD.
[v. 1]
But AE, by hypothesis, is the same multiple of CF that
A
AB is of CD; therefore EG is the same multiple of CD that
AM is of CD;
wherefore EG is equal to AB.
Take from them the common magnitude AE; the remainder
A G is equal to the remainder EB.
C
Wherefore, since AE is the same multiple of CF'that AG is
of FD, and since A G is equal to EB,
E
therefore AE is the same multiple of CF that EB is of FD.
F
But AE is the same multiple of CFxhaX AB is of CD;
therefore EB is the same multiple of FD that AB is of CD."
B D

