v. y, 8 ]

PROPOSITIONS 6—8

149

If therefore D is in excess of F, E is also in excess of F,
if equal to it, equal; and, if less, less.
And D, E are equimultiples of A, B,
while F is another, chance, multiple of C;
therefore, as A is to C, so is B to C.
[v. Def. 5]
I say next that C also has the same ratio to each of the
magnitudes A, B.
For, with the same construction, we can prove similarly
that D is equal to E;
and F is some other magnitude.
If therefore Fis in excess of D, it is also in excess of E,
if equal, equal; and, if less, less.
And F is a multiple of C, while D, E are other, chance,
equimultiples of A, B ;
therefore, as C is to A, so is C to B.
[v. Def. 5]
Therefore etc.
PORISM. From this it is manifest that, if any magnitudes
are proportional, they will also be proportional inversely.
Q. E. D.
In this proposition there is a similar use of o irvxev to that which has
been discussed under Prop. 4. Any multiple F of C is taken and then,
four lines lower down, we are told that " F' is another, chance, magnitude."
It is of course not any magnitude whatever, and Simson leaves out the
sentence, but this time without calling attention to it.
Of the Porism to this proposition Heiberg says that it is properly put here
in the best MS.; for, as August had already observed, if it was in its right
place where Theon put it (at the end of v. 4), the second part of the proof of
this proposition would be unnecessary. But the truth is that the Porism is no
more in place here. The most that the proposition proves is that, if A, B
are equal, and Cany other magnitude, then two conclusions are simultaneously
established, (1) that A is to C as B is to C and (2) that C is to A as C is to
B.
The second conclusion is not established from the first conclusion (as
it ought to be in order to justify the inference in the Porism), but from a
hypothesis on which the first conclusion itself depends; and moreover it is
not a proportion in its general form, i.e. between four magnitudes, that is in
question, but only the particular case in which the consequents are equal.
Aristotle tacitly assumes inversion (combined with the solution of the
problem of Eucl. Tt. 1 1 ) in Meteorologica tit. 5, 376 a 1 4 — 1 6 .

PROPOSITION 

8.

Of unequal magnitudes, the greater has to the same a
greater ratio than the less has; and the same has to the less
a greater ratio than it has to the greater.


