But GH is greater than D ;
therefore the whole FH

is in excess of D, M, that is, of N.

Now K is not in excess of N, inasmuch as FG also, which
is greater than GH, that is, than K, is not in excess of N.
And in the same manner, by following the above argu足
ment, we complete the demonstration.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.
T h e two separate cases found in the Greek text of the demonstration can
practically be compressed into one. Also the expositor of the two cases
makes them differ more than they need. It is necessary in each case to
select the smaller of the two segments AE, EB of AB with a view to taking
a multiple of it which is greater than D; in the first case therefore AE is
taken, in the second EB.
But, while in the first case successive multiples of
D are taken in order to find the first multiple that is greater than GH (or K),
in the second case the multiple is taken which is the first that is greater than
FG.
This difference is not necessary; the first multiple of D that is greater
than GH would equally serve in the second case. Lastly, the use of the
magnitude K might have been dispensed with in both cases; it is of no
practical use and only lengthens the proofs. For these reasons Simson
considers that Theon, or some other unskilful editor, has vitiated the
proposition. This however seems an unsafe assumption; for, while it was
not the habit of the great Greek geometers to discuss separately a number of
different cases (e.g. in i. 7 and 1. 35 Euclid proves one case and leaves the
others to the reader), there are many exceptions to prove the rule, e.g. Eucl.
in. 25 and 3 3 ; and we know that many fundamental propositions, after足
wards proved generally, were first discovered in relation to particular cases
and then generalised, so that Book v., presenting a comparatively new
theory, might fairly be expected to exhibit more instances than the earlier
books do of unnecessary subdivision. T h e use of the AT is no more con足
clusive against the genuineness of the proofs.
Nevertheless Simson's version of the proof is certainly snorter, and more足
over it takes account of the case in which AE is equal to EB, and of the case
in which- AE, EB are both greater than D (though these cases are scarcely
worth separate mention).
" I f the magnitude which is not the greater of the two AE, EB be (1)
not less than D, take FG, GHxhe doubles of AE,
EB.
But if that which is not the greater of the two AE, EB be (2) less than
D, this magnitude can be multiplied so as to become greater than D whether
it be AE or EB.
Let it be multiplied until it becomes greater than D, and let the other be
multiplied as often ; let FG be the multiple thus taken of AE and GH the
same multiple of EB,
therefore FG and GH axe. each of them greater than D.
And, in every one of the cases, take L the double of D, M its triple and
so on, till the multiple of D be that which first becomes greater than GH.
Let N be that multiple of D which is first greater than GH, and M'the
multiple of D which is next less than N.

