Nor again is B greater than A ;
for in that case C would have had to B a less ratio than it
has to A ;
[v. 8]
but it has not;
therefore B is not greater than A.
But it was proved that it is not equal either;
therefore B is less than A.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.
No better example can, I think, be found of the acuteness which Simson
brought to bear in his critical examination of the Elements, and of his great
services to the study of Euclid, than is furnished by the admirable note on
this proposition where he points out a serious flaw in the proof as given in
the text.
F o r the first time Euclid is arguing about greater and less ratios, and it
will be found by an examination of the steps of the proof that he assumes
more with regard to the meaning of the terms than he is entitled to assume,
having regard to the fact that the definition of greater ratio (Def. 7) is all
that, as yet, he has to go upon. That we cannot argue, at present, about
greater and less as applied to ratios in the same way as about the same terms
in relation to magnitudes is indeed sufficiently indicated by the fact that Euclid
does not assume for ratios what is in Book 1. an axiom, viz. that things which
are equal to the same thing are equal to one another; on the contrary, he
proves, in Prop. 1 1 , that ratios which are the same with the same ratio are the
same with one another.
Let us now examine the steps of the proof in the text. First we are told
that
"A is greater than B.
For, if not, it is either equal to B or less than it.
Now A is not equal to B;
for in that case each of the two magnitudes A, B would have had the
same ratio to C:
[v. 7]
but they have not:
therefore A is not equal to B."
As Simson remarks, the force of this reasoning is as follows.
If A has to C the same ratio as B has to C,
then—supposing any equimultiples of A, B to be taken and any multiple
of C—
by Def. 5, if the multiple of A be greater than the multiple of C, the multiple
of B is also greater than that of C.
But it follows from the hypothesis (that A has a greater ratio to C than B
has to C) that,
by Def. 7, there must be some equimultiples of A, B and some multiple of
C such that the multiple of A is greater than the multiple of C, but the
multiple of B is not greater than the same multiple of C.
And this directly contradicts the preceding deduction from the supposition
that A has to C the same ratio as B has to C;
therefore that supposition is impossible.

