v. io]

P R O P O S I T I O N 10

157

The proof now goes on thus :
" Nor again is A less than B;
for, in that case, A would have had to C a less ratio than B has to C;
but it has not;
therefore A is not less than B."
It is here that the difficulty arises. As before, we must use Def. 7.
"A
would have had to C a less ratio than B has to C," or the equivalent state­
ment that B would have had to C a greater ratio than A has to C, means
that there would have been some equimultiples of B, A and some multiple of
C such that
(1) the multiple of B is greater than the multiple of C, but
(2) the multiple of A is not greater than the multiple of C,
and it ought to have been proved that this can never happen if the hypothesis
of the proposition is true, viz. that A has to C a greater ratio than B has to
C: that is, it should have been proved that, in the latter case, the multiple of
A is always greater than the multiple of C whenever the multiple of B is
greater than the multiple of C (for, when this is demonstrated, it will be
evident that B cannot have a greater ratio to C than A has to C).
But this
is not proved (cf. the remark of De Morgan quoted in the note on v. Def. 7,
p. 130), and hence it is not proved that the above inference from the supposi­
tion that A is less than B is inconsistent with the hypothesis in the enunciation.
The proof therefore fails.
Simson suggests that the proof is not Euclid's, but the work of some one
who apparently "has been deceived in applying what is manifest, when
understood of magnitudes, unto ratios, viz. that a magnitude cannot be both
greater and less than another."
T h e proof substituted by Simson is satisfactory and simple.
" Let A have to C a greater ratio than B has to C;
A is greater than B.
For, because A has a greater ratio to C than B has to C, there are some
equimultiples of A, B and some multiple of C such that
the multiple of A is greater than the multiple of C, but the multiple of B
is not greater than it.
[v. Def. 7]
Let them be taken, and let D, E be equimultiples of A, B, and E a
multiple of C, such that
D is greater than E,
but
E is not greater than F.
Therefore D is greater than E.
And, because D and E are equimultiples of A and B, and D is greater
than E,
therefore A is greater than B.
[Simson's 4th Ax.]
Next, let C have a greater ratio to B than it has to A;
B is less than A.
For there is some multiple F of C and some equimultiples E and D of B
and A such that
F\& greater than E but not greater than D.
[v. Def. 7]
Therefore E is less than D;
and, because E and D are equimultiples of B and A,
therefore B is less than A."

