Similarly we can prove that neither is it in that ratio to
a greater;
it is therefore in that ratio to FD itself.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.

Algebraically, if
then

a : b = c : d,
(a + b) : b = (c + d) : d.

In the enunciation of. this proposition there is the same special use of
Siriprj/iiva and awTcBivTa as there was of crvyKci'uu'a and Siaipidivra in the
last enunciation. Practically, as the algebraical form shows, oijipij/i«Va might
have been left out.
The following is the method of proof employed by Euclid.
Given tnat

a : b = c : d,

suppose, if possible, that
(a+ 6) :b = (c + d):

(d±x).

Therefore, separando [v. 1 7 ] ,
a : b = (c + x) :
whence, by v. 1 1 ,

(d±x),

(c + x) : (d± x) = c : d.

But

(e-x)<e,

and

(e + x) > c, while (d—x)<

while (d + x) > d.
d,

which relations respectively contradict v. 14.
Simson pointed out (as Saccheri before him saw) that Euclid's demonstra­
tion is not legitimate, because it assumes without proof that to any three
magnitudes, two of which, at least, are of the same kind, there exists a fourth
proportional.
Clavius and, according to him, other editors made this an
axiom. But it is far from axiomatic; it is not till vi. 12 that Euclid shows,
by construction, that it is true even in the particular case where the three
given magnitudes are all straight lines.
In order to remove the defect it is necessary either (1) to prove beforehand
the proposition thus assumed by Euclid or (2) to prove v. 18 independently
of it.
Saccheri ingeniously proposed that the assumed proposition should be
proved, for areas and straight lines, by means of Euclid vi. 1, 2 and 12. As
he says, there was nothing to prevent Euclid from interposing these proposi­
tions immediately after v. 17 and then proving v. 18 by means of them,
vi. 12 enables us to construct the fourth proportional when the three given
magnitudes are straight lines; and vi. 12 depends only on vi. 1 and 2.
" Now," says Saccheri, " when we have once found the means of constructing
a straight line which is a fourth proportional to three given straight lines, we
obviously have the solution of the general problem ' T o construct a straight
line which shall have to a given straight line the same ratio which two polygons
have (to one another).'" For it is sufficient to transform the polygons into
two triangles of equal height and then to construct a straight line which shall
be a fourth proportional to the bases of the triangles and the given straight
line.
The method of Saccheri is, as will be seen, similar to that adopted by


