v. 18]

P R O P O S I T I O N 18

171

Smith and Bryant {foe. eit.) in proving the theorems of Euclid v. 16, 17, 18, 22,
so far as straight lines and rectilineal areas are concerned, by means of VI, 1.
De Morgan gives a sketch of a general proof of the assumed proposition
that, B being any magnitude, and P and Q two magnitudes of the same kind,
there does exist a magnitude A which is to B in the same ratio as P to Q.
" The right to reason upon any aliquot part of any magnitude is assumed;
though, in truth, aliquot parts obtained by continual bisection would suffice:
and it is taken as previously proved that the tests of greater and of less ratio
are never both presented in any one scale of relation as compared with
another" (see note on v. Def. 7 ad fin.).
" ( 1 ) If M be to B in a greater ratio than Pto Q, so is every magnitude
greater than M, and so are some less magnitudes; and if M be to B in
a less ratio than P to Q, so is every magnitude less than M, and so are
some greater magnitudes.
Part of this is in every system : the rest is proved
thus. If M be to B in a greater ratio than P to Q, say, for instance, we find
that 15 A/ lies between 22Z? and 23/?, while i$P lies before 22 Q. Let \$Af
exceed 22/? by Z; then, if N be less than M by anything less than the 15th
part of Z, \$N is between 22Z? and 232?: or N, less than M, is in a greater
ratio to B than P to Q. And similarly for the other case.
(2) Mean certainly be taken so small as to be in a less ratio to B than
P to Q, and so large as to be in a greater; and since we can never pass from
the greater ratio back again to the smaller by increasing M, it follows that,
while we pass from the first designated value to the second, we come upon an
intermediate magnitude A such that every smaller is in a less ratio to B than
P to Q, and every greater in a greater ratio. Now A cannot be in a less ratio
to B than P to Q, for then some greater magnitudes would also be in a less
ratio; nor in a greater ratio, for then some less magnitudes would be in a
greater ratio; therefore A is in the same ratio to B as Pto Q. T h e previously
proved proposition above mentioned shows the three alternatives to be the
only ones."
A l t e r n a t i v e p r o o f s o f V . 18.
Simson bases his alternative on v. 5, 6. As the 18th proposition is the
converse of the 17th, and the latter is proved by means of v. 1 and 2, of
which v. 5 and 6 are converses, the proof of v. 18 by v. 5 and 6 would be
natural; and Simson holds that Euclid must have proved v. 18 in this way
because "the 5th and 6th do not enter into the demonstration of any
proposition in this book as we have it, nor can they be of any use in any
proposition of the Elements," and "the 5th and 6th have undoubtedly been
put into the 5th book for the sake of some propositions in it, as all the other
propositions about equimultiples have been."
Simson's proof is however, as it seems to me, intolerably long and difficult
to follow unless it be put in the symbolical form as follows.
Suppose that a is to b as c is to d;
it is required to prove that a + b is to b as c + d is to d.
Take any equimultiples of the last four magnitudes, say
m(a + b),

mb,

m (e + d),

nb,

nd.

and any equimultiples of b, d, as

md,

