explanation, being a sort of by-product appearing without effort or trouble,
dirpoy/IATCVTW? (Proclus, p. 303, 6). But Heiberg thinks that Simson does
wrong in finding fault with the argument leading to the "Porism," and that
it does contain the true demonstration of conversion of a ratio. In this it
appears to me that Heiberg is clearly mistaken, the supposed proof on the
basis of Prop. 19 being no more correct than the similar attempt to prove the
inversion of a ratio from Prop. 4.
T h e words a r e : " And since it was
proved that, as AB is to CD, so is EB to ED,
alternately also, as AB is to BE, so is CD to

FD:

therefore magnitudes when compounded are proportional.
But it was proved that, as BA is to AE, so is DC to CF, and this is
convertendo."
It will be seen that this amounts to proving from the hypothesis a:b = c:d
that the following transformations are simultaneously true, viz.:
a: a — c = b : b — d,
and

a:c=b:d.

The former is not proved from the latter as it ought to be if it were intended
to prove conversion.
The inevitable conclusion is that both the "Porism" and the argument
leading up to it are interpolations, though no doubt made, as Heiberg says,
before Theon's time.
The conversion of ratios does not depend upon v. 19 at all but, as Simson
shows in his Proposition E (containing a proof already given by Clavius), on
Props. 17 and 18. Prop. E is as follows.
If four magnitudes be proportionals, they are also proportionals
that is, the first is to its excess above the second as the third is to
its excess above the fourth.

A

Let AB be to BE as CD to DF:
then BA is to AE as DC to CF.
Because AB is to BE as CD to DF,
by division [separando],
AE

by conversion,

is to EB as CF to FD,

[v. 17]
B

and, by inversion,
BE

is to EA as Z > ^ t o FC.
[Simson's Prop. B directly obtained from v. Def. 5]

Wherefore, by composition [componendo],
BA is to AE as DC to CF.

PROPOSITION

[v. 18]

20.

If there be three magnitudes, and others equal to them in
multitude, which taken two and two are in the same ratio, and
if ex aequali the first be greater than the third, the fourth will
also be greater than the sixth; if equal, equal; and, if less, less.


