VII. DEF. I]

DEFINITIONS

279

D E F I N I T I O N I.
Moms ecru', Kaff rjv CKCUTTOV TWV ovtwv tv

kiyerau

Iamblichus (fl. circa 3 0 0 A.D.) tells us (Comm. on Nicomachus,
ed. Pistelli,
p. 1 1 , 5 ) that the Euclidean definition of an unit or a monad was the definition
given by " m o r e r e c e n t " writers (01 vewrcpoi), and that it lacked the words
" even though it be collective " (k&v o w r n / j a T i x w j j ) . H e also gives (ibid.
p. 1 1 ) a number o f other definitions. ( 1 ) According to " s o m e o f the Pytha­
goreans," " an unit is the boundary between number and parts " (fiovas
icrrw
ipifi/iov Kal ixopimv ptOoptov), " because from it, as from a seed and eternal
root, ratios increase reciprocally on either side," i.e. on one side we have
multiple ratios continually increasing and on the other (if the unit be sub­
divided) submultiple ratios with denominators continually increasing. ( 2 ) A
somewhat similar definition is that of Thymaridas, an ancient Pythagorean,
who defined a monad as "limiting quantity" (iripaivowa
iroo-oTjjs), the
beginning and the end o f a thing being equally an extremity (ircpas).
Perhaps
the words together with their explanation may best be expressed by " limit o f
fewness." Theon of Smyrna (p. 1 8 , 6 , ed. Hiller) adds the explanation that
the monad is " t h a t which, when the multitude is diminished by way o f
continued subtraction, is deprived of all number and takes an abiding position
(/xonjV) and rest." If, after arriving at an unit in this way, we proceed to divide
the unit itself into parts, we straightway have multitude again. ( 3 ) Some, ac­
cording to Iamblichus (p. 1 1 , 1 6 ) , defined it as the "form o f forms" (ciooii' elSos)
because it potentially comprehends all forms of number, e g . it is a polygonal
number of any number of sides from three upwards, a solid number in all
forms, and so on. (We are forcibly reminded of the latest theories of number
as a " G a t t u n g " o f " M e n g e n " or as a " c l a s s of classes.") ( 4 ) Again an
unit, says Iamblichus, is the first, or smallest, in the category of how many
(»roo-dV), the common part or beginning of how many.
Aristotle defines it as
" t h e indivisible in the (category of) quantity," t o kcitol t o voaov dSiaipcrov
(Metaph.
1 0 8 9 b 3 5 ) , irocoV including in Aristotle continuous as well as
discrete quantity; hence it is distinguished from a point by the fact that it
has not position : " O f the indivisible in the category of, and qud, quantity,
that which is every way (indivisible) and destitute o f position is called an
unit, and that which is every way indivisible and has position is a point"
(Metaph.
1 0 1 6 b 2 5 ) . ( 5 ) In accordance with the last distinction, Aristotle
calls the unit " a point without position," orty/xij adtrot (Metaph.
1084 b 26).
( 6 ) Lastly, Iamblichus says that the school of Chrysippus defined it in a con­
fused manner (avyKtxyp.ivui<i) as "multitude one (irKijOo? lv)," whereas it is
alone contrasted with multitude. On a comparison o f these definitions, it
would seem that Euclid intended his to be a more popular
one than those
of his predecessors, 8tj/«ucV, as Nicomachus called Euclid's definition of an
even
number.
The etymological signification o f the word floras is supposed by Theon o f
Smyrna (p. 1 9 , 7 — 1 3 ) to be either ( 1 ) that it remains unaltered if it be
multiplied by itself any number of times, or ( 2 ) that it is separated and isolated
(ptp.ovd<r6ai) from the rest of the multitude o f numbers. Nicomachus also
observes (1. 8 , 2 ) that, while any number is half the sum ( 1 ) o f the adjacent
numbers on each side, ( 2 ) o f numbers equidistant on each side, the unit is
most solitary (pxtmrarri) in that it has not a number on each side but only on
one side, and it is half of the latter alone, i.e. o f 2 .

