VII. D E F F .

s—8]

NOTES

ON

DEFINITIONS 2 — 8

281

D E F I N I T I O N 5.
IIoXXa7rXao"TOS 8c 6 pti^wv tov i\do~aovo<i, brav KaTapxTprJTat vvb tov £\do~o-ovos.
T h e definition of a multiple is identical with that in v. Def. 2, except that
the masculine of the adjectives is used agreeing with dpif)/xos understood
instead o f the neuter agreeing with pkySo% understood.
Nicomachus (1. 1 8 ,
1) defines a multiple as being " a species o f the greater which is naturally
first in order and origin, being the number which, when considered in com­
parison with another, contains it in itself completely more than once."
D E F I N I T I O N S 6, 7.
6.

Apnos dpttfpds CORTY 6 8i\a

7.

N€PIO-O"OS 8e 6 pLTj Siatpovptvo ;

8tatpovp(vo<,.
1

ST^A fj [6] povdSt 8ta<pcpu)V apriov

dpiOpov.

Nicomachus (1. 7, 2 ) somewhat amplifies these definitions o f even and odd
numbers thus. " T h a t is even which is capable of being divided into two
equal parts without an unit falling in the middle, and that is odd which cannot
be divided into two equal parts because of the aforesaid intervention (p*O-iRCTAI') of the unit." H e adds that this definition is derived "from the popular
conception " ( « T^S 8»;p.(o8ovs u7ro\>;T//«<"S). In contrast to this, he gives ( I . 7, 3 )
the Pythagorean definition, which is, as usual, interesting. " An even number
is that which admits of being divided, by one and the same operation, into the
greatest and the least (parts), greatest in size (IR^AIKOVIRN) but least in quantity
(iroo-dnrrt)...while an odd number is that which cannot be so treated, but is
divided into two unequal parts." That is, as Iamblichus says (p. 1 2 , 2 — 9 ) , an
even number is divided into parts which are the greatest possible "parts," namely
halves, and into the fewest possible, namely two, two being the first " num­
ber " or "collection of units." According to another ancient definition quoted
by Nicomachus (1. 7, 4 ) , an even number is that which can be divided both
into two equal parts and into two unequal parts (except the first one, the
number 2, which is only susceptible o f division into equals), but, however it
is divided, must have its two parts of the same kind, i.e. both even or both
o d d ; while an odd number is that which can only be divided into two
unequal parts, and those parts always of different kinds, i.e. one odd and
one even. Lastly, the definition of odd and even " b y means of each other"
says that an odd number is that which differs by an unit from an even
number on both sides of it, and an even number that which differs by an
unit from an odd number on each side. This alternative definition o f an
odd number is the same thing as the second half of Euclid's definition, " t h e
number which differs by an unit from an even number." T h i s evidently
pre-Euclidean definition is condemned by Aristotle as unscientific, because
odd and even are coordinate, both being differentiae of number, so that one
should not be defined by means of the other (Topics vi. 4 , 1 4 2 b 7 — 1 0 ) .

DEFINITION 8.
'Apndicis dprios dpiBpoi
dpi8pov.

io-Tiv 6 vtto apriov

dptOpov PCRPOWPCI'OS Kara apTiov

Euclid's definition of an even-times even number differs from that given by
the later writers, Nicomachus, T h e o n of Smyrna and I a m b l i c h u s ; and the
inconvenience of it is shown when we come to i x . 3 4 , where it is proved

