that a certain sort o f number is both "even-times even" and "even-timesodd."
According to the more precise classification of the three other authorities, the
" even-times even " and the " even-times odd " are mutually exclusive and are
two o f three subdivisions into which even numbers fall. O f these three sub­
divisions the "even-times even " and the "even-times odd" form the extremes,
and the " odd-times even " is as it were intermediate, showing the character
of both extremes (cf. note on the following definition). T h e even-times even is
then the number which has its halves even, the halves of the halves even, and
so on, until unity is reached. In short the even-times even number is always
of the form 2". Hence Iamblichus (pp. 2 0 , 21) says Euclid's definition of it
as that which is measured by an even number an even number o f times is
erroneous. In support of this he quotes the number 2 4 which is four times 6 ,
or six times , but yet is not " even-times even " according to Euclid himself
(ot8i xar olvtov), by which he must apparently mean that 2 4 is also 8 times 3 ,
which does not satisfy Euclid's definition. T h e r e can however be no doubt that
Euclid meant what he said in his definition as we have i t ; otherwise IX. 3 2 ,
which proves that a number of the form 2" is even-times even only, would be quite
superfluous and a mere repetition of the definition, while, as already stated,
IX. 3 4 clearly indicates Euclid's view that a number might at the same time
be both even-times even and even-times odd.
Hence the pdVus which some
editor of the commentary o f l'hiloponus on Nicomachus found in some
copies, making the definition say that the even-times even number is only
measured by even numbers an even number of times, is evidently an interpo­
lation by some one who wished to reconcile Euclid's definition with the
Pythagorean (cf. Heiberg, Euklid-studien,
p. 2 0 0 ) .
4

A consequential characteristic of the series of even-times even numbers
noted by Nicomachus brings in a curious use of the word SvvapK (generally
power in the sense of square, or square root). H e says (1. 8 , 6 — 7 ) that any
part, i.e. any submultiple, of an even-times even number is called by an eventimes even designation, while it also has an even-times even value (it is
dpTmKK dpTioowa/xor) when expressed as so many actual units. That is, the
—th part o f 2" (where m is less than « ) is called after the even-times even
2
number 2"', while its actual value (ovVapis) in units is 2"""", which is also an
even-times even number. Thus all the parts, or submultiples, of even-times
even numbers, as well as the even-times even numbers themselves, are con­
nected with one kind of number only, the even.

D E F I N I T I O N 9.
"ApTiaKis hi wtpio-<r6<i io-nv
dpiOpov.

6 virb apriov

dpi6p.ov pcrpov/xcvos Kara, rrfpuro-bv

Euclid uses the term even-times odd (dprtdxis irtpio-o-ds), whereas Nicomachus
and the others make it one word, even-odd (dprioiripirroi).
According to the
stricter definition given by the latter (1. 9, 1 ) , the even-odd number is related to
the even-times even as the other extreme. I t is such a number as, when once
halved, leaves as quotient an odd number; that is, it is of the form 2 ( 2 ^ * + 1 ) .
Nicomachus sets the even-odd numbers out as follows,
6, 1 0 , 1 4 , 18, 2 2 , 2 6 , 3 0 , etc.
In this case, as Nicomachus observes, any part, or submultiple, is called by a
name not corresponding in kind to its actual value (Sv'fapw) in units. Thus,

