BOOK

VII

[vn. D K F P . 9 — 1 1

both definitions are genuine, this would not be true, for the number would be
odd-times even as well. i x . 3 4 says that " I f a number neither be one of those
which are continually doubled from 2, nor have its half odd, it is both eventimes even and even-times odd." T h e term odd-times even (irtpuro-dKis apriov)
not occurring in these propositions, nor anywhere else after the definition, that
definition becomes superfluous.
Iamblichus however (p. 2 4 , 7 — 1 4 ) quotes
these enunciations differently. In the first he has instead o f " even-times odd
only " the words " both even-times odd and odd-times even "; and, in the second,
for " both even-times even and even-times odd " he has " is both even-times
even and at the same time even-times odd and odd-times even." In both
cases therefore " odd-times even " is added to the enunciation as Iamblichus
had i t ; the words ca'nnot have been added by Iamblichus himself because
he himself does not use the term odd-times even, but the one word odd-even
(irepio-trdpTioi).
In order to get over the difficulties involved by Def. 1 0 and
these differences o f reading we have practically to choose between ( 1 ) accept­
ing Iamblichus' reading in all three places and ( 2 ) adhering to the reading of
our MSS. in i x . 3 3 , 3 4 and rejecting Def. 1 0 altogether as an interpolation.
Now the readings of our text of i x . 3 3 , 3 4 are those of the Vatican M S .
and the Theonine MSS. as well; hence they must go back to a time before
Theon, and must therefore be almost as old as those of Iamblichus.
Heiberg considers it improbable that Euclid would wish to maintain a point­
less distinction between even-limes odd and odd-times even, and on the whole
concludes that Def. 1 0 was first interpolated by some ignorant person who
did not notice the difference between the Euclidean and Pythagorean classi­
fication, but merely noticed the absence of a definition of odd-times
even
and fabricated one as a companion to the other. When this was done, it
would be easy to see that the statement in i x . 3 3 that the number referred
to is " even-times odd only " was not strictly true, and that the addition of
the words " a n d odd-times e v e n " was necessary in i x . 3 3 and i x . 3 4 as
well.
DEFINITION 1 0 .
ncpwrtrdias oc Trepwrtros dptOpos
Kara vipurabv
dpidpdv.

iaTiv

6 vtto Trtpurvov

aptOpoxi

1

ptrpovpfvo ;

T h e odd-times odd number is not defined as such by Nicomachus and
I a m b l i c h u s ; for them these numbers would apparently belong to the com­
posite subdivision of odd numbers. T h e o n of Smyrna on the other hand
says (p. 2 3 , 2 1 ) that odd-times odd was one of the names applied to prime
numbers (excluding 2 ) , for these have two odd factors, namely 1 and the
number itself. T h i s is certainly a curious use of the term.

DEFINITION
IIpa>T05 api&pos iuTiv o povaoi povy

II.

pfTpovp.tvos.

A prime number (wpuTos dp$px><:) is called by Nicomachus, Theon, and
Iamblichus a " p r i m e and incomposite (do-wpVros) number." Theon (p. 2 3 , 9 )
defines it practically as Euclid does, viz. as a number "measured by no number,
but by an unit only." Aristotle too says that a prime number is not measured by
any number (Anal. post. 11. 1 3 , 9 6 a 3 6 ) , an unit not being a number
(Metaph.
1 0 8 8 a 6 ) , but only the beginning of number (Theon of Smyrna says the same
thing, p. 2 4 , 2 3 ) . According to Nicomachus (1. i t , 2) the prime number is a

