subdivision, not o f numbers, but of odd numbers; it is " a n odd number
which admits of no other part except that which is called after its own name
(TropwVv/xov «auT<3)." T h e prime numbers are 3 , 5 , 7 etc., and there is no
submultiple of 3 except J r d , no submultiple of 1 1 except y j t h , and so on. In
all these cases the only submultiple is an unit. According to Nicomachus 3
is the first prime number, whereas Aristotle (Topics v m . 2, 1 5 7 a 3 9 ) regards
2 as a prime number: " a s the dyad is the only even number which is prime,"
showing that this divergence from the Pythagorean doctrine was earlier than
Euclid. T h e number 2 also satisfies Euclid's definition o f a prime number.
Iamblichus (p. 3 0 , 2 7 sqq.) makes this the ground of another attack upon Euclid.
His argument (the text of which, however, leaves much to be desired) appears
to be that 2 is the only even number which has no other part except an
unit, while the subdivisions of the even, as previously explained by him (the
even-times even, the even-odd, and odd-even), all exclude primeness, and he has
previously explained that 2 is potentially
even-odd, being obtained by
multiplying by 2 the potentially odd, i.e. the unit; hence 2 is regarded by him
as bound up with the subdivisions of even, which exclude primeness. T h e o n
seems to hold the same view as regards 2, but supports it by an apparent
circle. A prime number, he says (p. 2 3 , 1 4 — 2 3 ) , is also called odd-times odd;
therefore only odd numbers are prime and incomposite. Even numbers are
not measured by the unit alone, except 2, which therefore (p. 2 4 , 7 ) is oAA-likr
(trtpio-o-otihris) without being prime.
A variety o f other names were applied to prime numbers.
We have
already noted the curious designation of them as odd-times odd. According to
Iamblichus (p. 2 7 , 3 — 5 ) some called them euthymetric
(e£f?i>p«TpiKos), and
Thymaridas rectilinear
(dBvypappiKos),
the ground being that they can only be
set out in one dimension with no breadth (a7rAar^s y a p iv rrj cVSeo-ti «'<p' iv
pdvov Suo-rdpevos).
T h e same aspect o f a prime number is also expressed by
Aristotle, who (Metaph.
1 0 2 0 b 3 ) contrasts the composite number with that
which is only in one dimension (povov i<j> iv tar). T h e o n of Smyrna (p. 2 3 , 1 2 )
gives ypappixds (linear) as the alternative name instead o f itOvypappucos.
In
either case, to make the word a proper description o f a prime number we have
to understand the word only ; a prime number is that which is linear, or
rectilinear,
only.
For Nicomachus, who uses the form linear, expressly says
(11. 1 3 , 6) that all numbers are so, i.e. all can be represented as linear by dots
to the required amount placed in a line.
A prime number was called prime
or first, according to Nicomachus
(1. 1 1 , 3 ) , because it can only be arrived at by putting together a certain
number of units, and the unit is the beginning o f number (cf. Aristotle's
second sense of 7rp<oTos " a s not being composed of numbers" uis prj o-vyKtio-dai
i( dpSpwv,
Anal. Post. 11. 1 3 , 9 6 a 3 7 ) , and also, according to Iamblichus,
because there is no number before it, being a collection o f units (povdBmv
o-vo-rripa), of which it is a multiple, and it appears first as a basis for other
numbers to be multiples of.

D E F I N I T I O N 12.
llpuJToi

irpos aAA.i/\ous dpi&poi turiv ol povdSi povy p«Tpoi

f

01

koivw pirpw.

By way of further emphasising the distinction between " p r i m e " and
"prime to one another," Theon o f Smyrna (p. 2 3 , 6 — 8 ) calls the former
"prime absolutely"
(dirAus), and the latter "prime to one another and not

