286

BOOK

VII

[VH. DEFF.

12—14

absolutely " or "not in themselves" (ov (cat? avrovt).
T h e latter (p. 2 4 , 8 — 1 0 )
are " measured by the unit [sc. only] as common measure, even though, taken
by themselves (<os irpos iavrovs), they be measured by some other numbers."
From T h e o n ' s illustrations it is clear that with him as with Euclid
a number prime to another may be even as well as odd. In Nicomachus
(1. 1 1 , 1 ) and Iamblichus (p. 2 6 , 1 9 ) , on the other hand, the number which is
" in itself secondary (oWtpos) and composite (o-wforo?), but in relation to
another prime and incomposite," is a subdivision of odd- I shall call more
particular attention to this difference o f classification when we have reached
the definitions o f " composite " and " composite to one a n o t h e r " ; for the
present it is to be noted that Nicomachus (1. 1 3 , 1 ) defines a number prime to
another after the same manner as the absolutely prime; it is a number which
" is measured not only by the unit as the common measure but also by some
other measure, and for this reason can also admit of a part or parts called by
a different name besides that called by the same name (as itself), but, when
examined in comparison with another number o f similar character, is found
not to b e capable o f being measured by a common measure in relation to the
other, nor to have the same part, called by the same name as (any of) those
simply (dirXus) contained in the o t h e r ; e.g. 9 in relation to 2 5 , for each of
these is in itself secondary and composite, but, in comparison with one
another, they have an unit alone as a common measure and no part is called
by the same name in both, but the third in one is not in the other, nor is the
fifth in the other found in the first."

DEFINITION 1 3 .
SvydcTos dpiOpoi ianv

b dpi&pto twi /xerpovpevot.

Euclid's definition o f composite is again the same as Theon's definition
of numbers " c o m p o s i t e in relation to themselves," which (p. 2 4 , 1 6 ) are
" n u m b e r s measured by any less number," the unit being, as usual, not
regarded as a number. T h e o n proceeds to say that " of composite numbers
they call those which are contained by two numbers plane,
as being
investigated in two dimensions and, as it were, contained by a length and a
breadth, while (they call) those (which are contained) by three (numbers)
solid, as having the third dimension added to them." T o a similar effect is
the remark o f Aristotle (Metaph.
1 0 2 0 b 3 ) that certain numbers are
" composite and are not only in one dimension but such as the plane and the
solid (figure) are representations o f (piprjpa), these numbers being so many
times so many (iroo-aKis voo-ot), or so many times so many times so many
(iroo-dxn iroo-dicis iroo-01) respectively." T h e s e subdivisions o f composite
numbers are, o f course, the subject o f Euclid's definitions 1 7 , 1 8 respectively.
Euclid's composite numbers may be either even or odd, like those of Theon,
who gives 6 as an instance, 6 being measured by both 2 and 3 .

DEFINITION 1 4 .
2 w # € t o i 8c irpos aA.A17A.ous dpidpoC tUrw ol dpidpip T i n ptrpovpcvoi
koivu
pfVpU).
T h e o n (p. 2 4 , 1 8 ) , like Euclid, defines numbers composite to one another as
" those which are measured by any common measure whatever" (excluding
unity, as usual). T h e o n instances 8 and 6 , with 2 as common measure, and
6 and 9 , with 3 as common measure.

