As hinted above, there is a great difference between Euclid's classification
of prime and composite numbers, and o f numbers prime and composite
to one another, and the classification found in Nicomachus (1. 1 1 — 1 3 ) and
Iamblichus. According to the latter, all these kinds o f numbers are sub­
divisions o f the class of odd numbers only. As the class o f even numbers is
divided into three kinds, ( 1 ) the even-times even, ( 2 ) the even-odd, which
form the extremes, and ( 3 ) the odd-even, which is, as it were, intermediate to
the other two, so the class of odd numbers is divided into three, of which the
third is again a mean between two extremes. T h e three a r e :
( 1 ) the prime and incomposite,
that it excludes 2 ;

which is like Euclid's prime number except

( 2 ) the secondary arid composite, which is " o d d because it is a distinct
part of one and the same genus (Sid TO i£ ivbs koX tov airov yeVous Sra/sotpio-tfiu)
but has in it nothing of the nature o f a first principle (dpxoa&U);
for it arises
from adding some other number (to itself), so that, besides having a part
called by the same name as itself, it possesses a part or parts called by another
name." Nicomachus cites 9 , 1 5 , 2 1 , 2 5 , 2 7 , 3 3 , 3 5 , 3 9 . It is made clear that
not only must the factors be both odd, but they must all be prime numbers.
This is obviously a very inconvenient restriction of the use of the word
composite, a word o f general signification.
( 3 ) is that which is "secondary
and composite in itself but prime
and
incomposite to another."
T h e actual words in which this is defined have been
given above in the note on Def. 1 2 . Here again all the factors must be odd
and prime.
Besides the inconvenience o f restricting the term composite to odd numbers
which are composite, there is in this classification the further serious defect,
pointed out by Nesselmann (Die Algebra
der Griechen,
1 8 4 2 , p. 1 9 4 ) , that
subdivisions ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) overlap, subdivision ( 2 ) including the whole of
subdivision ( 3 ) . T h e origin of this confusion is no doubt to be found in
Nicomachus' perverse anxiety to be symmetrical; by hook or by crook he
must divide odd numbers into three kinds as he had divided the even.
Iamblichus (p. 2 8 , 1 3 ) carries his desire to be logical so far as to point out
why there cannot be a fourth kind of number contrary in character to ( 3 ) ,
namely a number which should be " prime and incomposite in itself, but
secondary and composite to another " !

D E F I N I T I O N 15.
*Apir?/xds dptdpbv Tro\\aTrXao-id£civ KiytTai, brav, doai tlcriv iv avTa)
TOffavraKis o-vvrtOy b 7roAAa7rAa0"ia£d/iei'Os, Kai ycvrrrai t i s .
This is the well known
abbreviation of addition.

primary

definition

of

povdSts,

multiplication as an

DEFINITION 16.
' O t o v Sc &vo dpiBpol

7roAAairAao-ido-aiTC9 dWijkovt

i r o i u c i nva, 6 ycv6p,€VOi

cTTiVeoos KaActrai, TrAeupai oe a v r o u 01 7 r o A A c n r A a o - i d o w r c s dWyXovs

dpiOpoi.

T h e words plane and solid applied to numbers are o f course adapted from
their use with reference to geometrical figures. A number is therefore called
linear (ypappiKot)
when it is regarded as in one dimension, as being a length

