(/h^kos).
When it takes another dimension in addition, namely
breadth
(a-AdVo?), it is in two dimensions and becomes plane
(eViVtSos).
The
distinction between a plane and a plane number is marked by the use of the
neuter in the former case, and the masculine, agreeing with dp&pos, in the
latter case. So with a square and a square number, and so on. T h e most
obvious form o f a plane number is clearly that corresponding to a rectangle in
geometry; the number is the product o f two linear numbers regarded as sides
(irXtvpai) forming the length and breadth respectively. Such a number is, as
Aristotle says, " s o many times so many," and a plane is its counterpart
(ptpr/pa).
So Plato, in the Tfieaetetus ( 1 4 7 E — 1 4 8 B ) , says : " W e divided all
numbers into two kinds, ( j ) that which can be expressed as equal multiplied
by equal (rbv Swdptvov Xo-ov 10-dias yLyvto-Oat), and which, likening its form to
the square, we called square and equilateral; ( 2 ) that which is intermediate,
and includes 3 and 5 and every number which cannot be expressed as equal
multiplied by equal, but is either less times more or more times less, being
always contained by a greater and a less side, which number we likened to
the oblong figure (irpopriKd o-xqpaTi) and callea an oblong number.... Such
lines therefore as square the equilateral
and plane number [i.e. which can
form a plane number with equal sides, or a squarej we defined as length
(prJKO'i); but such as square the oblong (here (Tfpopi)Ki)';) [i.e. the square of
which is equal to the oblong] we called roots (Swdptis)
as not being com­
mensurable with the others in length, but only in the plane areas (E7RI7RC8OIS),
to which the squares on them are equal (d Siivamu)." T h i s passage seems
to make it clear that Plato would have represented numbers as Euclid does,
by straight lines proportional in length to the numbers they represent (so far
as practicable); for, since 3 and 5 are with Plato oblong numbers, and lines
with him represent the sides o f oblong numbers (since a line represents the
" root," the square on which is equal to the oblong), it follows that the unit
representing the smaller side must have been represented as a line, and 3 , the
larger side, as a line of three times the length. But there is another possible way
of representing numbers, not by lines of a certain length, but by points disposed
in various ways, in straight lines or otherwise. Iamblichus tells us (p. 5 6 , 2 7 )
that " in old days they represented the quantuplicities of number in a more
natural way (<pvo-iKu>Tepov) by splitting them up into units, and not, as in our
day, by s y m b o l s " (o-up/3OAI<tais). Aristotle too (Metaph.
1 0 9 2 b 1 0 ) mentions
one Eurytus as having settled what number belonged to what, such a number
to a man, such a number to a horse, and so on, "copying their shapes"
(reading t o u t w , with Zeller) " with pebbles (Tats iprj<t>0K), just as those do who
arrange
numbers in the forms of triangles
or squares."
W e accordingly find
numbers represented in Nicomachus and T h e o n of Smyrna by a number of
a's ranged like points according to geometrical figures. According to this
system, any number could be represented by points in a straight line, in which
case, says Iamblichus (p. 5 6 , 2 6 ) , we shall call it rectilinear because it is
without breadth and only advances in length (dVAaTws « r i pdvov t o /x^xos
wpoturw).
T h e prime number was called by Thymaridas rectilinear j>ar
excellence, because it was without breadth and in one dimension only (i<f> tv
pjdvov oWrdpci'os). B y this must h i meant the impossibility o f representing,
say, 3 as a plane number, in Plato's sense, i.e. as a product of two numbers
corresponding to a rectangle in geometry; and this view would appear to rest
simply upon the representation o f a number by points, as distinct from lines.
T h r e e dots in a straight line would have no breadth ; and if breadth were
introduced in the sense of producing a rectangle, i.e. by placing the same

