VII. D E F . l 6 ]

N O T E ON D E F I N I T I O N 16

number o f dots in a second line below the first line, the first plane number
would be 4 , and 3 would not be a plane number at all, as Plato says it is. I t
seems therefore to have been the alternative representation o f a number by
points, and not lines, which gave rise to the different view of a plane number
which we find in Nicomachus and the rest. B y means of separate points we
can represent numbers in geometrical forms other than rectangles and squares.
One dot with two others symmetrically arranged below it shows a
triangle,
which is a figure in two dimensions as much as a rectangle or parallelogram is.
Similarly we can arrange certain numbers in the form o f regular pentagons
or
other polygons. According therefore to this mode o f representation, 3 is the
first plane number, being a triangular
number. T h e method o f formation o f
triangular, square, pentagonal and other polygonal numbers is minutely
described in Nicomachus (11. 8 — 1 1 ) , who distinguishes the separate series o f
gnomons belonging to each, i.e. gives the law determining the number which
has to be added to a polygonal number with n in a side, in order to make it
into a number of the same form but with n + 1 in a side (the addend being of
course the gnomon). T h u s the gnomonic series for triangular numbers is
> > 3> 4 ) 5 ' " J that for squares 1, 3 , 5 , 7 . . . ; that for pentagonal numbers
1, 4 , 7, 1 0 . . . , and so on. T h e subject need not detain us longer here, as we
are at present only concerned with the different views of what constitutes a
plane number.
l

2

O f plane numbers in the Platonic and Euclidean sense we have seen that
Plato recognises two kinds, the square and the oblong (rrpo/iijKijit or €T€pop.ijieijt).
Here again Euclid's successors, at all events, subdivided the class more
elaborately. Nicomachus, T h e o n of Smyrna, and Iamblichus divide plane
numbers with unequal sides into ( 1 ) o-tpo/u/Ktw, the nearest thing to squares,
viz. numbers in which the greater side exceeds the less side by 1 only, or
numbers of the form n (n + 1), e.g. 1 . 2, 2. 3 , 3 . 4 , etc. (according to Nico­
machus), and ( 2 ) irpopjptew, or those whose sides differ by 2 or more, i.e. are of
the form n (« + m), where m is not less than 2 (Nicomachus illustrates by 2 . 4 ,
3 . 6 , etc.). T h e o n o f Smyrna (p. 3 0 , 8 — 1 4 ) makes wpo/ajxtn include irtpopAjKus,
saying that their sides may differ by 1 or more; he also speaks of
parallelogramnumbers as those which have one side different from the other by 2 or m o r e ;
I do not find this latter term in Nicomachus or Iamblichus, and indeed it
seems superfluous, as parallelogram
is here only another name for oblong.
Iamblichus (p. 7 4 , 2 3 sqq.), always critical o f Euclid, attacks him again here
for confusing the subject by supposing that the frtpopJKrp number is the pro­
duct of any two different numbers multiplied together, and by not distinguishing
the oblong (irpopj/iojt) from i t : " for his definition declares the same number
to be square and also irtpopyKrp,
as for example 3 6 , 1 6 and many o t h e r s :
which would be equivalent to the odd number being the same thing as the
even." No importance need be attached to this exaggerated statement; it is
in any case merely a matter of words, and it is curious that Euclid does not in
fact use the word eYcpopijmjs of numbers at all, but only o f geometrical oblong
figures as opposed to squares, so that Iamblichus can apparently only have
inferred that he used it in an unorthodox manner from the geometrical
use o f
the term in the definitions o f Book I. and from the fact that he does not give
the two subdivisions of plane numbers which are not square, but seems only
to divide plane numbers into square and not-square. T h e argument that
irtpopiJKtK
numbers are a natural,
and therefore essential, subdivision
Iamblichus appears to found on the method o f successive addition by which
they can be evolved; as square numbers are obtained by successively adding

