BOOK

VII

[VII.

DEFF.

iC,

17

odd numbers as gnomons, so ETCPOPI/ITCIS are obtained by adding even numbers
as gnomons. T h u s 1 . 2 = 2, 2 . 3 = 2 + 4 , 3 . 4 = 2 + 4 + 6 , and so on.

DEFINITION 17.
*OTAI> Sc Tpeis dptOpol 7roXXa7rXao-ido*AVTCS dXXiyXovs 7roidkri Tiva, 6 ytvofitvos
CRREPEDS « m v , 7rXcupai 8c avrov 01 7roXXa7rXao-td<rajTcs dXX^XOUS dptOpoi.
What has been said of the two apparently different ways of regarding a
plane number seems to apply equally, mutatis mutandis, to the definitions of a
solid number. Aristotle regards it as a number which is so many times so
many times so many (iroo-dxis iroo-dxis iroaov).
Plato finishes the passage about
lines which represent the sides of square numbers and lines which are roots
(8wdpe«), i.e. the squares on which are equal to the rectangle representing a
number which is oblong and not square, by adding the words, " And another
similar property belongs to solids " (koX irepi TO. orcpcd dXXo TOIOOTOV). T h a t is,
apparently, there would be a corresponding term to root (Sdrapis)—practically
representing a surd—to denote the side of a cube equal to a parallelepiped
representing a solid number which is the product o f three factors but
not a cube. Such is a solid number when numbers are represented by
straight lines:
it corresponds in general to a parallelepiped and, when all
the factors are equal, to a cube.
But again, if numbers be represented by points, we may have solid numbers
(i.e. numbers in three dimensions) in the form of pyramids
as well. T h e first
number o f this kind is 4 , since we may have three points forming an
equilateral triangle in one plane and a fourth point placed in another plane.
T h e length o f the sides can be increased by 1 successively; and we can have
a series of pyramidal numbers, with triangles, squares or polygons as bases,
made up of layers o f triangles, squares or similar polygons respectively, each
of which layers has one less in the side than the layer below it, until the top
of the pyramid is reached, which of course, is one point representing unity.
Nicomachus (11. 1 3 — 1 6 ) , Theon of Smyrna (p. 4 1 — 2 ) , and Iamblichus
(P- 95> S M.)>
gi
different kinds of pyramidal
solid numbers in
addition to the other kinds.
T h e s e three writers make the following further distinctions between solid
numbers which are the product of three factors.
J

S(

a

u

y e

t

h

e

1. First there is the equal by equal by equal (10-dias to-dias IO-OS), which is,
of course, the cube.
2. T h e other extreme is the unequal by unequal by unequal (dno-aKi?
dvurd.Ki's aVio-09), or that in which all the dimensions are different, e.g. the
product o f 2 , 3 , 4 or 2, 4 , 8 or 3 , 5, 1 2 . T h e s e were, according to Nicomachus
(11. 1 6 ) , called scalene, while some called them O-^H'O-KOI (wedge-shaped),
others
o-^ijKicr/tot (from o-<t>rj(, a wasp), and others /Suptcr/coi (altar-shaped).
Theon
appears to use the last term only, while Iamblichus of course gives all three
names.
3 . Intermediate to these, as it were, come the numbers "whose planes
form CR«popi;Kci9 n u m b e r s " (i.e. numbers of the formv*(«+ 1 ) ) . These, says
Nicomachus, are called
parallelepipedal.
Lastly come two classes o f such numbers each of which has two equal
dimensions but not more.

