BOOK

VII

DEFINITION

[VII. DEF. 2 0

20.

'ApiBuol dvaXoyov turiv, orav o irp<uros t o v Scvrcpov koI 6 TpiTos toC TtrapTov
io-d/as g 7roXXa7rXdcrios i) t o avrd pt'pos ^ rd avrd pe'pij axrti'.
Euclid does not give in this Book any definition o f ratio, doubtless because
it could only b e the same as that given at the beginning o f Book v., with
numbers substituted for "homogeneous magnitudes" and " i n respect of size"
(mjXtKoVip-o) omitted or altered. W e do not find that Nicomachus and the
rest give any substantially different definition o f a ratio between numbers.
T h e o n of Smyrna says, in fact (p. 73, 1 6 ) , that " ratio in the sense o f
proportion (Xdyos 6 icar dvdXoyov) is a sort of relation of two homogeneous
terms to one another, as for example, double, triple." Similarly Nicomachus
says ( n . 2 1 , 3 ) that " a ratio is a relation of two terms to one another," the word
for " relation " being in both cases the same as Euclid's (cr^co-u). Theon of
Smyrna goes on to classify ratios as greater, less, or equal, i.e. as ratios of greater
inequality, less inequality, or equality, and then to specify certain arithmetical
ratios which had special names, for which he quotes the authority of Adrastus.
T h e names were TroXXajrXdo-ios, cVipdpios, tVtpepijs, iroXXairXao-uirifidpiOT,
7roXXa7rXao-i€iripep7ys (the first o f which is, o f course, a multiple, while the rest
are the equivalent o f certain types o f improper fractions as we should call
them), and the reciprocals o f each o f these described by prefixing wro or sub.
After describing these particular classes of arithmetical ratios, Theon goes on
to say that numbers still have ratios to one another even if they are different
from all those previously described. We need not therefore concern ourselves
with the various types; it is sufficient to observe that any ratio between
numbers can b e expressed in the manner indicated in Euclid's definition o f
arithmetical proportion, for the greater is, in relation to the less, either one or
a combination o f more than one o f the three things, ( 1 ) a multiple, ( 2 ) a
submultiple, (3) a proper fraction.
I t is when we come to the definition o f proportion
that we begin to find
differences between Euclid, Nicomachus, Theon and Iamblichus. "Proportion,"
says T h e o n (p. 8 2 , 6 ) , " i s similarity or sameness of more ratios than one,"
which is o f course unobjectionable if it is previously understood what a ratio
i s ; but confusion was brought in by those (like Thrasyllus) who said that
there were three proportions
(dWXoyiat), the arithmetic, geometric, and
harmonic, where o f course the reference is to arithmetic, geometric and
harmonic means (jumoTipK).
H e n c e it was necessary to explain, as Adrastus
did (Theon, p. 1 0 6 , 1 5 ) , that o f the several means " t h e geometric was called
both proportion par excellence and primary...though the other means were
also commonly called proportions
by some writers."
Accordingly we have
Nicomachus trying to extend the term "proportion" to cover the various
means as well as a proportion in three or four terms in the ordinary sense. H e
says (11. 2 1 , 2 ) : " Proportion,/<zr excellence (icvpiW), is the bringing together
(cniXX^if) to the same (point) o f two or more ratios; or, more generally, (the
bringing together) o f two or more relations (<r\itrtw),
even though they be
subjected not to the same ratio but to a difference or some other (law)."
Iamblichus keeps the senses o f the word more distinct. H e says, like Theon,
that "proportion is similarity or sameness o f several ratios" (p. 9 8 , 1 4 ) , and
that " i t is to be premised that it was the geometrical (proportion) which the
ancients called proportion par excellence, though it is now common to apply
the name generally to all the remaining means as well " (p. 1 0 0 , 1 5 ) . Pappus

