remarks (ill. p. 7 0 , 1 7 ) , " A mean differs from a proportion in this respect that, if
anything is a proportion, it is also a mean, but not conversely. For there are
three means, of which one is arithmetic, one geometric and one harmonic."
T h e last remark implies plainly enough that there is only one
proportion
(dWAoyta) in the proper sense.
So, too, says Iamblichus in another place
(p. 1 0 4 , 1 9 ) : " t h e second, the geometric, mean has been called
proportion
par excellence because the terms contain the same ratio, being separated
according to the same proportion (dVd rbv airbv \6yov
Sieo-iwts)."
The
natural conclusion is that of Nesselmann, that originally the geometric
proportion was called aWXoyta, the others, the arithmetic, the harmonic, etc.,
means ; but later usage had obliterated the distinction.
O f proportions in the ancient and Euclidean sense T h e o n (p. 8 2 , 1 0 )
distinguished the continuous (o-vvc\Vs) and the separated (h'lrjprip.ivrj), using the
same terms as Aristotle (Eth. Nic. 1 1 3 1 a 3 2 ) .
T h e meaning is of course
clear: in the continuous proportion the consequent o f one ratio is the ante­
cedent of the n e x t ; in the separated proportion this is not so. Nicomachus
(11. 2 i , 5 — 6 ) uses the words connected (o-vvnv.fn.ivri) and disjoined
(oitt.cvyii.ivrj)
respectively. Euclid regularly speaks of numbers in continuous proportion as
" proportional in order, or successively " (iirj% dvdXoyov).

DEFINITION 2 1 .
'Opoioi CTTTVESOT K<u orepeoi dpiOpoi eunv ol dvdXoyov e^ovres r d s TrAcupds.
Theon of Smyrna remarks (p. 3 6 , 1 2 ) that, among plane numbers, all
squares are similar, while o f irepopr/Kus those are similar "whose sides, that
is, the numbers containing them, are proportional."
Here irtpop-nK-ni
must
evidently be used, not in the sense of a number o f the form n (n + 1 ) , but as
synonymous with irpopijicrfs, any oblong number ; so that on this occasion
Theon follows the terminology o f Plato and (according to Iamblichus) of
Euclid. Obviously, if the strict sense of irtpoprJKrp;
is adhered to, no two
numbers of that form can be similar unless they are also equal.
We may
compare Iamblichus' elaborate contrast o f the square and the
irtpop-nKrp.
Since the two sides o f the square are equal, a square number might, as he
says (p. 8 2 , 9 ) , be fitly called iSiopr/KJJS (Nicomachus uses TavropdxTjs) in
contrast to irtpop.r]K-q%; and the ancients, according to him, called square
numbers " the same " and " similar" (ra&rovs T« «ai dpotous), but inpop-qKti.%
numbers " dissimilar and other " (dVopoidus K<U Barlpovs).
With regard to solid numbers, T h e o n remarks in like manner (p. 3 7 , 2 )
that all cube numbers are similar, while of the others those are similar whose
sides are proportional,- i.e. in which, as length is to length, so is breadth to
breadth and height to height.

DEFINITION 22.
TcAcios dpidpds CCTIV 6 TOIS iavrov plpto-iv

"<ros <ui'.

Theon of Smyrna (p. 4 5 , 9 sqq.) and Nicomachus (1. 1 6 ) both give
the same definition of a perfect number, as well as the law of formation o f
such numbers which Euclid proves in the later proposition, i x . 3 6 . T h e y
add however definitions of two other kinds of numbers in contrast with it,
( 1 ) the over-perfect
(uVcprtAijs in Nicomachus, iniprikiim
in T h e o n ) , the

