294

BOOK

VII

sum of whose parts, i.e. submultiples, is greater than the number itself, e.g. 1 2 ,
24 etc., the sum o f the parts o f 12 being 6 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 = 1 6 , and the
sum o f the parts of 2 4 being 1 2 + 8 + 6 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 = 3 6 , ( 2 ) the defective
(CXXIJITJS), the sum o f whose parts is less than the whole, e.g. 8 or 1 4 , the
parts in the first case adding up to 4 + 2 + 1, or 7 , and in the second case to
7 + 2 + 1, or 1 0 . All three classes are however made by Theon subdivisions
of numbers in general, but by Nicomachus subdivisions of even numbers.
T h e term perfect was used by the Pythagoreans, but in another sense, of
1 0 ; while Theon tells us (p. 4 6 , 1 4 ) that 3 was also called perfect " b e c a u s e
it is the first number that has beginning, middle and extremity; it is also both
a line and a plane (for it is an equilateral triangle having each side made up
of two units), and it is the first link and potentiality o f the solid (for a solid
must be conceived of in three dimensions)."
T h e r e are certain unexpressed axioms used in Book vn. as there are in
earlier Books.
T h e following may be noted.
1.

I f A measures B, and B measures C, A will measure C.

2.
I f A measures B, and also measures C, A will measure the difference
between B and C when they are unequal.
3.
I f A measures B, and also measures C, A will measure the sum of B
and C.
I t is clear, from what we know of the Pythagorean theory of numbers, of
musical intervals expressed by numbers, o f different kinds of means etc., that
the substance o f Euclid Books v n . — i x . was no new thing but goes back, at
least, to the Pythagoreans. I t is well known that the mathematics of Plato's
Timaeus is essentially Pythagorean. I t is therefore a priori probable (if not
perhaps quite certain) that Plato irvflayopifei even in the passage ( 3 2 A, B ) where
he speaks o f numbers " whether solid or square " in continued proportion,
and proceeds to say that between planes one mean suffices, but to connect
two solids two means are necessary. T h i s passage has been much discussed,
but I think that by " planes " and " solids " Plato certainly meant square and
solid numbers
respectively, so that the allusion must be to the theorems
established in Eucl. v m . n , 1 2 , that between two square numbers there is
one mean proportional number, and between two cube numbers there are
two mean proportional numbers .
1

1

It is true that similar plane and solid numbers have the same property (Eucl. v m . 18,
19); but, if Plato had meant similar plane and solid numbers generally, I think it would
have been necessary to specify that they were " similar," whereas, seeing that the Timaeus is
as a whole concerned with regular figures, there is nothing unnatural in allowing tegular or
equilateral to be understood. Further Plato speaks first of Jwd^EIS andfry/COIand then of
" p l a n e s " (MTcda) and " s o l i d s " {oTepid) in such a way as to suggest that ovv&ntu cor­
respond to iTrLirtSa and Hyicoi to arepcd. N o w the regular meaning of Svvafiis is square (or
sometimes square root), and I think it is here used in the sense of square, notwithstanding
that Plato seems to speak of three squares in continued proportion, whereas, in general, the
mean between two squares as extremes would not be square but oblong. And, if Swd/ieit are
squares, it is reasonable to suppose that the tynoi are also equilateral, i.e. the " s o l i d s " are
cubes. I am aware that T h . Habler (Bibliotheca 'Mathematica, v m , 1908, pp. 173—4)
thinks that the passage is to be explained by reference to the problem of the duplication of
the cube, and does not refer to numbers at all. Against this we have to put the evidence of
Nicomachus (it. 24, 6) who, in speaking of " a certain Platonic theorem," quotes the very
same results of Eucl. v m . 1 1 , 12. Secondly, it is worth noting that Habler's explanation is
distinctly ruled out by Democritus the Platonist (3rd cent. A.D.) who, according to Proclus
3

