HISTORICAL NOTE

295

It is no less clear that, in his method and line o f argument, Euclid was
following earlier models, though no doubt making improvements in the ex­
position. T h e tract on the Sectio Canonis, KaraTopr) Karorot (as to the genuine­
ness of which see above, Vol. 1., p. 1 7 ) is in style and in the form of the
propositions generally akin to the Elements.
In one proposition ( 2 ) the author
says "we learned (ipdOopw)
that, if as many numbers as we please be in (con­
tinued) proportion, and the first measures the last, the first will also measure
the intermediate numbers " ; here he practically quotes Elem. v m . 7. I n the
3rd proposition he proves that no number can be a mean between two
numbers in the ratio known as hnpopim, the ratio, that is, o f n + 1 to n, where
n is any integer greater than unity. Now, fortunately, Boethius, De
institutione
musica, in. n (pp. 2 8 5 — 6 , ed. Friedlein), has preserved a proof by Archytas
of this same proposition; and the proof is substantially identical with that
of Euclid. T h e two proofs are placed side by side in an article by Tannery
(Bibliotheca
Mathematica,
vi , 1 9 0 5 / 6 , p. 2 2 7 ) . Archytas writes the smaller
term of the proportion first (instead o f the greater, as Euclid does). Let, he
says, A, B be the " superparticularis proportio " (ivipopiov Sido-njua in Euclid).
T a k e C, DE the smallest numbers which are in the ratio of A to B.
[Here
DE means D + E: and in this respect the notation is different from that o f
Euclid who, as usual, takes a line DF divided into two parts at G, GF
corresponding to E, and DG to D, in Archytas' notation. T h e step of taking
C, DE, the smallest numbers in the ratio of A to B, presupposes Eucl. vn.
3 3 . ] Then DE exceeds C by an aliquot part of itself and of C [cf. the
definition of impopuK dpiOpos in Nicomachus, 1. 1 9 , 1 ] . Let D be the excess
[i.e. E is supposed equal to C\ " I say that D is not a number but an unit."
?

For, if D is a number and a part o f DE, it measures DE; hence it
measures E, that is, C.
Thus D measures both C and DE, which is
impossible ; for the smallest numbers which are in the same ratio as any
numbers are prime to one another. [This presupposes Eucl. vn. 2 2 . ] There­
fore D is an unit; that is, DE exceeds C by an unit. H e n c e no number can
be found which is a mean between two numbers C, DE.
Therefore neither
can any number be a mean between the original numbers A, B which are in
the same ratio [this implies Eucl. vn. 2 0 ] .
We have then here a clear indication o f the existence at least as early as
the date of Archytas (about 4 3 0 — 3 6 5 B . C . ) of an Elements
of Arithmetic
in
the form which we call Euclidean; and no doubt text-books o f the sort
existed even before Archytas, which probably Archytas himself and Eudoxus
improved and developed in their turn.
{In Platonis Timaeum commentaria, 149 c), said that the difficulties of the passage of the
Timaeus had misted some people into connecting it with the duplication of the cube,
whereas it really referred to similar planes and solids with sides in rational numbers.
Thirdly, I do not think that, under the supposition that the Delian problem is referred to,
we get the required sense. T h e problem in that case is not that of finding two mean
proportionals between two cubes but that of finding a second cube the content of which
shall be equal to twice, or k times (where k is any number not a complete cube), the content
of a given cube (a ). T w o mean proportionals are found, not between cubes, but between
two straight lines in the ratio of 1 to k, or between a and ka. Unless k is a cube, there
would be no point in saying that two means are necessary to connect 1 and k, and not one
mean; for i]k is no more natural than ^jk, and would be less natural in the case where k
happened to be square. On the other hand, if k is a cube, so that it is a question of finding
means between cube numbers, the dictum of Plato is perfectly intelligible ; nor is any real
difficulty caused by the generality of the statement that two means are always necessary to
connect them, because any property enunciated generally of two cube numbers should
obviously be true of cubes as such, that is, it must hold in the extreme case of two cubes
which are prime to one another.
3

