R O O K

X I I .

HISTORICAL

NOTE.

T h e predominant feature of Book x n . is the use of the method of
exhaustion, which is applied in Propositions 2, 3—5, i o , n , 12, and (in a
slightly different form) in Propositions 1 6 — 1 8 . W e conclude therefore that
for the content of this Book Euclid was greatly indebted to Eudoxus, to whom
the discovery of the method of exhaustion is attributed. T h e evidence for
this attribution comes mainly from Archimedes. ( 1 ) In the preface to On
the Sphere and Cylinder i., after stating the main results obtained by himself
regarding the surface of a sphere or a segment thereof, and the volume and
surface of a right cylinder with height equal to its diameter as compared with
those of a sphere with the same diameter, Archimedes a d d s : " Having now
discovered that the properties mentioned are true of these figures, I cannot
feel any hesitation in setting them side by side both with my former investiga­
tions and with those of the theorems of Eudoxus on solids which are held to be
most irrefragably established, namely that any pyramid is one third part of the
prism which has the same base with the pyramid and equal height [i.e. Eucl.
x n . 7], and that any cone is one third part of the cylinder which has the same
base with the cone and equal height [i.e. Eucl. XII. 10]. For, though these
properties also were naturally inherent in the figures all along, yet they were
in fact unknown to all the many able geometers who lived before Eudoxus
and had not been observed by any one." (2) In the preface to the treatise
known as the Quadrature of the Parabola Archimedes states the " lemma "
assumed by him and known as the " A x i o m of Archimedes" (see note on x . 1
above) and proceeds : " Earlier geometers (01 irportpov yctu/ic'rpat) have also
used this lemma; for it is by the use of this same lemma that they have
shown that circles are to one another in the duplicate ratio of their diameters
[Eucl. x n . 2], and that spheres are to one another in the triplicate ratio of their
diameters [Eucl. x n . 18], and further that every pyramid is one third part of the
prism which has the same base with the pyramid and equal height [Eucl. x n . 7 ] ;
also, that every cone is one third part of the cylinder which has the same base
with the cone and equal height [Eucl. XII, 10] they proved by assuming a certain
lemma similar to that aforesaid." T h u s in the first passage two theorems of
Eucl. x n . are definitely attributed to E u d o x u s ; and, when Archimedes says,
in the second passage, that "earlier geometers" proved these two theorems
by means of the lemma known as the " Axiom of A r c h i m e d e s " and of a
lemma similar to it respectively, we can hardly suppose him to be alluding to

