366

BOOK

XII

any other proof than that given by Eudoxus. A s a matter of fact, the lemma
used by Euclid to prove both propositions ( x n . 3—5 and 7, and x n . 10) is the
theorem of Eucl. x. 1. A s regards the connexion between the two " l e m m a s "
see note on x . 1.
W e are not, however, to suppose that none of the results obtained by
the method of exhaustion had been discovered before the time of Eudoxus
(fl. about 368—s B . C . ) . T w o at least are of earlier date, those of Eucl. x n . 2
and x n . 7.
(a) Simplicius (Comment, in Aristot. Phys. p. 61, ed. Diels) quotes
Eudemus as saying, in his History of Geometry, that Hippocrates of Chios
(fl. say 430 B.C.) first laid it down (COSTO) that similar segments of circles are
in the ratio of the squares on their bases and that he proved this (i&tUwtv) by
proving ( « TOV 8ti£ai) that the squares on the diameters have the same ratio
as the (whole) circles. W e know nothing of the method by which Hippo­
crates proved this proposition; but, having regard to the evidence from
Archimedes quoted above, it is not permissible to suppose that the method
was the fully developed method of exhaustion as we know it.
(6) As regards the two theorems about the volume of a pyramid and of
a cone respectively, which Eudoxus was the first to prove, we now have
authentic evidence in the short treatise by Archimedes discovered by Heiberg
in a MS. at Constantinople in 1906 and published in Hermes the following
year (see now Archimedis opera omnia, ed. Heiberg, 2. ed., V o l . 11., 1913,
pp. 4 2 5 — 5 0 7 ; T . L. Heath, The Method of Archimedes, Cambridge, 1912).
T h e said treatise, complete in all essentials, bears the title *Apxw^<"" * P
fii]XaviKi2v 6«opr)fia.TWV IRPO9 "EpartxrOivrpt <?<po8os. This " M e t h o d " (or "Plan of
attack "), addressed to Eratosthenes, is none other than the i<j>6Siov on which,
according to Suidas, Theodosius wrote a commentary, and which is several
times cited by Heron in his Metrica; its discovery adds a new and important
chapter to the history of the integral calculus. In the preface to this work
Archimedes alludes to the theorems which he first discovered by means of
mechanical considerations, but proved afterwards by geometry, because the
investigation by means of mechanics did not constitute a rigid proof; he
observes, however, that the mechanical method is of great use for the discovery
of theorems, and it is much easier to provide the rigid proof when the fact
to be proved has once been discovered than it would be if nothing were
known to begin with. H e goes on : " Hence too, in the case of those
theorems the proof of which was first discovered by Eudoxus, namely those
relating to the cone and the pyramid, that the cone is one third part of the
cylinder, and the pyramid one third part of the prism, having the same base
and equal height, no small part of the credit will naturally be assigned to
Democritus, who was the first to make the statement (of the fact) regarding
the said figure [i.e. property], though without proving it." Hence the discovery
of the two theorems must now be attributed to Democritus (fl. towards the
end of 5th cent. B . C ) . T h e words "without proving i t " ( x P « ds-oSfifcois) do
not mean that Democritus gave no sort of proof, but only that he did not give
a proof on the rigorous lines required later; for the same words are used by
Archimedes of his own investigations by means of mechanics, which, however,
do constitute a reasoned argument. T h e character of Archimedes' mechanical
arguments combined with a passage of Plutarch about a particular question in
infinitesimals said to have been raised by Democritus may perhaps give a clue
to the line of Democritus' argument as regards the pyramid. T h e essential
w

