HISTORICAL

NOTE

367

feature of Archimedes' mechanical arguments in this tract is that he regards
an area as the sum of an infinite number of straight lines parallel to one
another and terminated by the boundary or boundaries of the closed figure
the area of which is to be found, and a volume as the sum of an infinite
number of plane sections parallel to one another: which is of course the same
thing as taking (as we do in the integral calculus) the sum of an infinite
number of strips of breadth dx (say), when dx becomes indefinitely small, or
the sum of an infinite number of parallel laminae of depth dz (say), when dz
becomes indefinitely small. T o give only one instance, we may take the
case of the area of a segment of a parabola cut off by a chord.
Let CBA be the parabolic segment, CE the tangent at C meeting the

diameter EBD

through the middle point of the chord CA in E, so that
EB = BD.
Draw AF parallel to ED meeting CE produced in F. Produce CB to
H so that CK=KH,
where K is the point in which CH meets AF; and
suppose CH to be a lever.
Let any diameter MNPO be drawn meeting the curve in P and CF, CK,
CA in M, N, 0 respectively.
Archimedes then observes that
CA . AO = MO : OP
(" for this is proved in a lemma "),
whence
HK: KN= MO : OP,
so that, if a straight line TG equal to PO be placed with its middle point at
H, the straight line MO with centre of gravity at N, and the straight line TG
•vith centre of gravity at H, will balance about K.
Taking all other parts of diameters like PO intercepted between the curve
and CA, and placing equal straight lines with their centres of gravity at H,
these straight lines collected at H will balance (about K) all the lines like
MO parallel to FA intercepted within the triangle CFA in the positions in
which they severally lie in the figure.
Hence Archimedes infers that an area equal to that of the parabolic
segment hung at H will balance (about K) the triangle CFA hung at its
centre of gravity, the point X (a point on CK such that CK- 3XK), and
therefore that
(area of triangle CFA): (area of segment) = HK: KX
= 3 •• 1.

