from which it follows that
area of parabolic segment = %AAEC.
The same sort of argument is used for solids, plane sections taking the
place of straight lines.
Archimedes is careful to state once more that this method of argument
does not constitute a proof. Thus, at the end of the above proposition about
the parabolic segment, he a d d s : " This property is of course not proved by
what has just been said; but it has furnished a sort of indication (liijxuriv nva)
that the conclusion is true."
Let us now turn to the passage of Plutarch (De Comm. Not. adv. Stoicos
x x x i x 3) about Democritus above referred to. Plutarch speaks of Democritus
as having raised the question in natural philosophy (^VO-IKW?) : " if a cone
were cut by a plane parallel to the base [by which is clearly meant a plane
indefinitely near to the base], what must we think of the surfaces of the
sections, that they are equal or unequal ? For, if they are unequal, they will
make the cone irregular, as having many indentations, like steps, and unevennesses; but, if they are equal, the sections will be equal, and the cone will
appear to have the property of the cylinder and to be made up of equal, not
unequal circles, which is very absurd." T h e phrase "made up of equal...circles"
({$ LAMV <RVYK€i/I.FV(K...KVK\A>V) shows that Democritus already had the idea of
a solid being the sum of an infinite number of parallel planes, or indefinitely
thin laminae, indefinitely near together: a most important anticipation of the
same thought which led to such fruitful results in Archimedes. If then one
may hazard a conjecture as to Democritus' argument with regard to a pyramid,
it seems probable that he would notice that, if two pyramids of the same
height and equal triangular bases are respectively cut by planes parallel to the
base and dividing the heights in the same ratio, the corresponding sections of
the two pyramids are equal, whence he would infer that the pyramids are
equal as being the sum of the same infinite number of equal plane sections
or indefinitely thin laminae. (This would be a particular anticipation of
Cavalieri's proposition that the areal or solid contents of two figures are equal
if two sections of them taken at the same height, whatever the height may be,
always give equal straight lines or equal surfaces respectively.) A n d
Democritus would of course see that the three pyramids into which a prism
on the same base and of equal height with the original pyramid is divided (as
in Eucl. x n . 7) satisfy this test of equality, so that the pyramid would be one
third part of the prism. T h e extension to a pyramid with a polygonal base
would be easy. A n d Democritus may have stated the proposition for the
cone (of course without an absolute proof) as a natural inference from the
result of increasing indefinitely the number of sides in a regular polygon
forming the base of a pyramid.

