CHAPTER II.
EUCLID'S

OTHER

WORKS.

IN giving a list of the Euclidean treatises other than the Elements,
I shall be brief: for fuller accounts of them, or speculations with
regard to them, reference should be made to the standard histories of
mathematics .
I will take first the works which are mentioned by Greek authors.
I. The Pseudaria.
I mention this first because Proclus refers to it in the general
remarks in praise of the Elements which he gives immediately after
the mention of Euclid in his summary. H e s a y s : "But, inasmuch
as many things, while appearing to rest on truth and to follow from
scientific principles, really tend to lead one astray from the principles
and deceive the more superficial minds, he has handed down methods
for the discriminative understanding of these things as well, by the
use of which methods we shall be able to give beginners in this study
practice in the discovery of paralogisms, and to avoid being misled.
This treatise, b y which he puts this machinery in our hands, he
entitled (the book) of Pseudaria, enumerating in order their various
kinds, exercising our intelligence in each case b y theorems of all
sorts, setting the true side b y side with the false, and combining
the refutation of error with practical illustration. This book then is
by way of cathartic and exercise, while the Elements contain the
irrefragable and complete guide to the actual scientific investigation
of the subjects of geometry."
1

2

The book is considered to be irreparably lost. W e may conclude
however from the connexion of it with the Elements and the reference
to its usefulness for beginners that it did not go outside the domain
of elementary geometry'.
1

See, for example, Loria, Le scienze
esatte
neW antica
Grecia,
1 9 1 4 , pp. 345—268;
T . L. Heath, History
ofGreek
Mathematics,
1921, 1. pp. 421—446. Cf. Heiberg,
Litterargcsckichtlichc
Studicn
iiber Euklid,
pp. 3 6 — 1 5 3 ; Euclidis
opera omnia,
ed. Heiberg and

Menge, Vols. vi.—vm.
Proclus, p. 70, 1—18.
* Heiberg points out that Alexander Aphrodisiensis appears to allude to the work in his
commentary on Aristotle's Sophistici
Elenchi
(fol. 25 b ) : "Not only those ((Xeyxat)
which do
not start from the principles of the science under which the problem is classed...but also
those which do start from the proper principles of the science but in some respect admit a
2

paralogism, e.g. the Pseudographemata

of Euclid." Tannery (Butt,

des sciences

math,

et

astr.

2" Sene, VI., 1882, 1'™ Partie, p. 147) conjectures that it may be from this treatise that the
same commentator got his information about the quadratures of the circle by Antiphon and

