2. T h e Data.
The Data (SeSo/j.eva) are included by Pappus in the Treasury of
Analysis (TOTTO? ivaXvofievoi), and he describes their contents . They
are still concerned with elementary geometry, though forming part
of the introduction to higher analysis. Their form is that of pro­
positions proving that, if certain things in a figure are given (in
magnitude, in species, etc.), something else is given. T h e subjectmatter is much the same as that of the planimetrical books of the
Elements, to which the Data are often supplementary. W e shall see
this later when we come to compare the propositions in the Elements
which give us the means of solving the general quadratic equation
with the corresponding propositions of the Data which give the
solution. T h e Data may in fact be regarded as elementary exercises
in analysis.
It is not necessary to g o more closely into the contents, as we
have the full Greek text and the commentary by Marinus newly
edited by Menge and therefore easily accessible .
3. T h e book On divisions (of figures').
This work (irepl Siaipeo-eayv fii/3\iov) is mentioned b y Proclus'.
In one place he is speaking of the conception or definition (X0709)
of figure, and of the divisibility of a figure into others differing from
it in k i n d ; and he adds: " For the circle is divisible into parts unlike
in definition or notion (avo/wia TO5 \6y<p), and so is each of the
rectilineal figures; this is in fact the business of the writer of the
Elements in his Divisions, where he divides given figures, in one case
into like figures, and in another into unlike ." " L i k e " and "unlike"
here mean, not "similar" and "dissimilar" in the technical sense, but
" l i k e " or "unlike in definition or notion" (koytp): thus to divide a
triangle into triangles would be to divide it into " l i k e " figures, to
divide a triangle into a triangle and a quadrilateral would be to
divide it into " u n l i k e " figures.
The treatise is lost in Greek but has been discovered in the
Arabic. First John Dee discovered a treatise De divisionibus b y one
Muhammad Bagdadinus and handed over a copy of it (in Latin) in
1563 to Commandinus, who published it, in Dee's name and his own,
in 1570 . D e e did not himself translate the tract from the Arabic ; he
1

3

4

6

6

Bryson, to say nothing of the lunules of Hippocrates. I think however that there is an
objection to this theory so far as regards Bryson; for Alexander distinctly says that Bryson's
quadrature did not start from the proper principles of geometry, but from some principles
more general.
Pappus, VII. p. 638.
Vol. VI. in the Teubner edition of Euclidis
opera omnia by Heiberg and Menge. A
translation of the Data is also included in Simson's Euclid (though naturally his text left
much to be desired).
1

3

8

Proclus, p. 69, 4.

* ibid. 144, 12—26.

5

K

Steinschneider places him in the iothc. H. Suter (Bibliotheca
Malhematua,
I V , , 1903,
p. 24, 27) identifies him with Abu (Bekr) Muh. b. 'AbdalbaqI al-Bagdadl, Qadi (Judge) of
[aristan (circa

Euclidis
6

Ioannis

r o 7 0 - H 4 i ) , to whom he also attributes the Liber

judei

(? judicis) super

decimum

translated by Gherard of Cremona.

De superficierum
Dee Londinensis

divisionibus
et Federici

liber Machomelo
Bagdadino
adscriptus,
Commandini
Urbinatis
opera in lucem

1570, afterwards included in Gregory's Euclid (Oxford, 1703).

nunc
editus,

primum
Pisauri,

