found it in Latin in a MS. which was then in his own possession but
was about 20 years afterwards stolen or destroyed in an attack by a
mob on his house at Mortlake'. Dee, in his preface addressed to
Commandinus, says nothing of his having translated the book, but
only remarks that the very illegible MS. had caused him much trouble
and (in a later passage) speaks of " the actual, very ancient, copy from
which I wrote out..." (in ipso unde descripsi vetustissimo exemplari).
The Latin translation of this tract from the Arabic was probably made
by Gherard of Cremona (1114-1187), among the list of whose numerous
translations a " liber divisionum " occurs. T h e Arabic original cannot
have been a direct translation from Euclid, and probably was not even
a direct adaptation of i t ; it contains mistakes and unmathematical
expressions, and moreover does not contain the propositions about
the division of a circle alluded to by Proclus. Hence it can scarcely
have contained more than a fragment of Euclid's work.
But Woepcke found in a MS. at Paris a treatise in Arabic on the
division of figures, which he translated and published in 1851 . It is
expressly attributed to Euclid in the MS. and corresponds to the
description of it by Proclus. Generally speaking, the divisions are
divisions into figures of the same kind as the original figures, e.g. of
triangles into triangles; but there are also divisions into " unlike"
figures, e.g. that of a triangle by a straight line parallel to the base.
The missing propositions about the division of a circle are also here:
" to divide into two equal parts a given figure bounded b y an arc
of a circle and two straight lines including a given angle " and " to
draw in a given circle two parallel straight lines cutting off a certain
part of the circle." Unfortunately the proofs are given of only four
propositions (including the two last mentioned) out o f 36, because
the Arabic translator found them too easy and omitted them. T o
illustrate the character of the problems dealt with I need only take
one more example: " T o cut off a certain fraction from a (parallel-)
trapezium by a straight line which passes through a given point lying
inside or outside the trapezium but so that a straight line can be
drawn through it cutting both the parallel sides of the trapezium."
The genuineness of the treatise edited by Woepcke is attested by the
facts that the four proofs which remain are elegant and depend on
propositions in the Elements, and that there is a lemma with a true
Greek ring: " to apply to a straight line a rectangle equal to the
rectangle contained by AB, AC and deficient by a square!' Moreover
the treatise is no fragment, but finishes with the words " end of the
treatise," and is a well-ordered and compact whole. Hence we may
safely conclude that Woepcke's is not only Euclid's own work but
the whole of it. A restoration of the work, with proofs, was attempted
by Ofterdinger , who however does not give Woepcke's props. 30, 31,
34, 35, 36- W e have now a satisfactory restoration, with ample notes
s

3

1

R. C . Archibald, Euclid's
Book on the Division
of Figures
with a restoration
based on
Woepcke's
text and on the Practica
geometriae
of Leonardo
Pisano,
Cambridge, 1915, pp. 4—9.
Journal
Asiatique,
1851, p. 233 sqq.
L. F. Ofterdinger, Beitrage
zur fViederherstetlung
der Schrift
des Euklides
fiber die
Theilung
der Figuren,
Ulm, 1853.
2

3

