and an introduction, by R. C Archibald, who used for the purpose
Woepcke's text and a section of Leonardo of Pisa's Practica geotnetriae
(1220) .
4. T h e Porisms.
It is not possible to give in this place any account of the con­
troversies about the contents and significance of the three lost books
of Porisms, or of the important attempts by Robert Simson and
Chasles to restore the work. These may be said to form a whole
literature, references to which will be found most abundantly given
by Heiberg and Loria, the former of whom has treated the subject
from the philological point of view, most exhaustively, while the
latter, founding himself generally on Heiberg, has added useful
details, from the mathematical side, relating to the attempted restora­
tions, etc. It must suffice here to give an extract from the only
original source of information about the nature and contents of the
Porisms, namely Pappus . In his general preface about the books
composing the Treasury of Analysis ( T W O S dvaXvo/ievot) he says :
"After the Tangencies (of Apollonius) come, in three books, the
Porisms of Euclid, [in the view of many] a collection most ingeniously
devised for the analysis of the more weighty problems, [and] although
nature presents an unlimited number of such porisms , [they have
added nothing to what was written originally by Euclid, except that
some before my time have shown their want of taste by adding to a
few (of the propositions) second proofs, each (proposition) admitting
of a definite number of demonstrations, as we have shown, and
Euclid having given one for each, namely that which is the most
lucid. These porisms embody a theory subtle, natural, necessary,
and of considerable generality, which is fascinating to those who can
see and produce results].
" Now all the varieties of porisms belong, neither to theorems nor
problems, but to a species occupying a sort of intermediate position
[so that their enunciations can be formed like those of either theorems
or problems], the result being that, of the great number of geometers,
some regarded them as of the class of theorems, and others of pro­
blems, looking only to the form of the proposition. But that the
ancients knew better the difference between these three things is
clear from the definitions. For they said that a theorem is that
which is proposed with a view to the demonstration of the very
thing proposed, a problem that which is thrown out with a view to
the construction of the very thing proposed, and a porism that which
is proposed with a view to the producing of the very thing proposed.
[But this definition of the porism was changed by the more recent
writers who could not produce everything, but used these elements
1

2

3

4

1

There is a remarkable similarity between the propositions of Woepcke's text and those
of Leonardo, suggesting that Leonardo may have had before him a translation (perhaps by
Gherard of Cremona) of the Arabic tract.
Heiberg, Euklid-Studien,
pp. 56—79, and Loria, op. cit., pp. 253—265.
Pappus, ed. Hultsch, VII. pp. 648—660. I put in square brackets the words bracketed
by Hultsch.
I adopt Heiberg's reading of a comma here instead of a full stop.
2
3

4

