and proved only the fact that that which is sought really exists, but
did not produce i t and were accordingly confuted by the definition
and the whole doctrine. T h e y based their definition on an incidental
characteristic, thus: A porism is that which falls short of a locustheorem in respect of its hypothesis'. O f this kind of porisms loci
are a species, and they abound in the Treasury o f A n a l y s i s ; but
this species has been collected, named and handed down separately
from the porisms, because it is more widely diffused than the other
species]. But it has further become characteristic of porisms that,
owing to their complication, the enunciations are put in a contracted
form, much being by usage left to be understood; so that many
geometers understand them only in a partial way and are ignorant of
the more essential features of their contents.
"[Now to comprehend a number of propositions in one enunciation
is by no means easy in these porisms, because Euclid himself has not
in fact given many of each species, but chosen, for examples, one or a
few out of a great multitude'. But at the beginning of the first book
he has given some propositions, to the number of ten, of one species,
namely that more fruitful species consisting of loci.] Consequently,
finding that these admitted of being comprehended in one enunciation,
we have set it out thus:
If, in a system of four straight lines which cut each other
two and two, three points on one straight line be given while the
rest except one lie on different straight lines given in position,
the remaining point also will lie on a straight line given in
position".
1

4

1

Heiberg points out that Props. 5—9 of Archimedes' treatise On Spirals are porisms in
this sense. To take Prop. 5 as an example, DBF is a tangent to a circle with centre K.
It is then possible, says Archimedes, to draw a straight line
D
B
F
KHF, meeting the circumference in H and the tangent in F
such that
Y

FH:

HK<(SLK

BH):c,

where c is the circumference of any circle. To prove this he
assumes the following construction. E being any straight line
greater than c, he says : let KG be parallel to DF, " and let
the line GH equal to £ be placed verging
to the point B."
Archimedes must of course have known how to effect this
construction, which requires conies. But that it is possible requires very little argument, for
if we draw any straight line BHG meeting the circle in H and KG in G, it is obvious that
as G moves away from C, HG becomes greater and greater and may be made as great as we
please. The " later writers " would no doubt have contented themselves with this considera­
tion without actually constructing
HG.
' As Heiberg says, this translation is made certain by a preceding passage of Pappus
(p. 648, 1—3) where he compares two enunciations, the latter of which " falls short of the
former in hypothesis but goes beyond it in requirement.' '
E.g. the first enunciation requiring
us, given three circles, to draw a circle touching all three, the second m a y require us, given
only two circles (one less datum), to draw a circle touching them and of a given size (an
extra requirement).
' I translate Heiberg's reading with a full stop here followed b y Tpbi
W &l"*t [ r a i l
1

ipxv

ipXV" {SfSofiiyov) Hultsch] T O U vpurov

BtfiUov....

4

The four straight lines are described in the text as (the sides) inrrlov $ rapwrlov, i.e.
sides of two' sorts of quadrilaterals which Simson tries to explain (see p. 120 of the Index
Graecitalis
6

of Hultsch's edition of PaDpus).

In other words (Chasles, p. 23; Loria, p. 256), if a triangle be so deformed that each of
its sides turns about one of three points in a straight line, and two of its vertices lie on t w o
straight lines given in position, the third vertex will also lie on a straight line.

