"This has only been enunciated of four straight lines, of which not
more than two pass through the same point, but it is not known (to
most people) that it is true of any assigned number of straight lines
if enunciated thus:
If any number of straight lines cut one another, not more
than two (passing) through the same point, and all the points
(of intersection situated) on one of them be given, and if each of
those which are on another (of them) lie on a straight line given
in position—
or still more generally thus :
if any number of straight lines cut one another, not more than
two (passing) through the same point, and all the points (of
intersection situated) on one of them be given, while of the other
points of intersection in multitude equal to a triangular number
a number corresponding to the side of this triangular number lie
respectively on straight lines given in position, provided that of
these latter points no three are at the angular points of a triangle
(sc. having for sides three of the given straight lines)—each of the
remaining points will lie on a straight line given in position .
" It is probable that the writer of the Elements was not unaware
of this but that he only set out the principle; and he seems, in the
case of all the porisms, to have laid down the principles and the
seed only [of many important things], the kinds of which should be
distinguished according to the differences, not of their hypotheses, but
of the results and the things sought. [All the hypotheses are different
from one another because they are entirely special, but each of the
results and things sought, being one and the same, follow from many
different hypotheses.]
" W e must then in the first book distinguish the following kinds of
things sought:
" A t the beginning of the book is this proposition :
I. ' If from two given points straight lines be drawn
meeting
on a straight line given in position, and one cut off from a straight
line given in position (a segment measured) to a given point on it,
the other will also cut off from another (straight line a segment)
liaving to the first a given ratio.'
" Following on this (we have to prove)
II. that such and such a point lies on a straight line given
in position;
III. that the ratio of such and such a pair of straight lines
is g i v e n ; "
1

2

etc. etc. (up to x x i x . ) .

" The three books of the porisms contain 38 lemmas; of the
theorems themselves there are 1 7 1 . "
1

Loria (p. 256, « . 3) gives the meaning of this as follows, pointing out that Simson was
the discoverer of it: " If a complete «-lateral be deformed so that its sides respectively turn
about « points on a straight line, and ( « - 1) of its n(n- i)/2 vertices move on as many
straight lines, the other ( « - i ) ( » - 2 ) / 2 of its vertices likewise move on as many straight
lines: but it is necessary that it should be impossible to form with the ( « - 1) vertices any
triangle having for sides the sides of the polygon."
• Reading, with Heiberg, TOV /3t/3Xiov [TOV f Hultsch].

