Pappus further gives lemmas to the Porisms (pp. 866—918, ed.
Hultsch).
With Pappus' account of Porisms must be compared the passages
of Proclus on the same subject. Proclus distinguishes two senses in
which the word iropio-fia is used. T h e first is that of corollary where
something appears as an incidental result of a proposition, obtained
without trouble or special seeking, a sort of bonus which the investi­
gation has presented us with . T h e other sense is that of Euclid's
Porisms*.
In this sense* "porism is the name given to things which
are sought, but need some finding and are neither pure bringing into
existence nor simple theoretic argument. For (to prove) that the
angles at the base of isosceles triangles are equal is a matter of
theoretic argument, and it is with reference to things existing that
such knowledge is (obtained). But to bisect an angle, to construct a
triangle, to cut off", or to place—all these things demand the making
of something; and to find the centre of a given circle, or to find the
greatest common measure of two given commensurable magnitudes,
or the like, is in some sort between theorems and problems. For in
these cases there is no bringing into existence of the things sought,
but finding of them, nor is the procedure purely theoretic. For it is
necessary to bring that which is sought into view and exhibit it to
the eye. Such are the porisms which Euclid wrote, and arranged in
three books of Porisms.'
Proclus' definition thus agrees well enough with the first, " older,"
definition of Pappus. A porism occupies a place between a theorem
and a problem: it deals with something already existing, as a theorem
does, but has to find it (e.g. the centre of a circle), and, as a certain
operation is therefore necessary, it partakes to that extent of the
nature of a problem, which requires us to construct or produce some­
thing not previously existing. Thus, besides III. I of the Elements
and x. 3, 4 mentioned by Proclus, the following propositions are
real porisms: III. 25, VI. 1 1 — 1 3 , v n . 33, 34, 36, 39, VIII. 2, 4, X. 10,
XIII. 18. Similarly in Archimedes On the Sphere and Cylinder I. 2—6
might be called porisms.
The enunciation given by Pappus as comprehending ten of Euclid's
propositions may not reproduce the form of Euclid's enunciations ;
but, comparing the result to be proved, that certain points lie on
straight lines given in position, with the class indicated by II. above,
where the question is of such and such a point lying on a straight line
given in position, and with other classes, e.g. (v.) that such and such a
line is given in position, (vi.) that such and such a line verges to a given
point, (XXVII.) that there exists a given point such that straight lines
drawn from it to such and such (circles) will contain a triangle given
in species, we may conclude that a usual form of a porism was " to
prove that it is possible to find a point with such and such a property"
1

1

Proclus; pp. I l l , 1 4 ; 301, 22.
' ibid. p. 212, 12. "The term porism is used of certain problems, like the
written by Euclid."
* ibid.

pp. 301,

35

sqq.

Porisms

