or " a straight line on which lie all the points satisfying given
conditions" etc.
Simson denned a porism thus: " Porisma est propositio in qua
proponitur demonstrare rem aliquam, vel plures datas esse, cui, vel
quibus, ut et cuilibet e x rebus innumeris, non quidem datis, sed quae
ad ea quae data sunt eandem habent relationem,convenire ostendendum
est affectionem quandam communem in propositione descriptam ."
From the above it is easy to understand Pappus' statement that
loci constitute a large class of porisms. A locus is well defined by
Simson thus: " Locus est propositio in qua propositum est datam
esse demonstrare, vel invenire lineam aut superficiem cuius quodlibet
punctum, vel superficiem in qua quaelibet linea data lege descripta,
communem quandam habet proprietatem in propositione descriptam."
Heiberg cites an excellent instance of a locus which is a porism, namely
the following proposition quoted by Eutocius from the Plane Loci of
Apollonius:
" Given two points in a plane, and a ratio between unequal straight
lines, it is possible to draw, in the plane, a circle such that the straight
lines drawn from the given points to meet on the circumference of
the circle have (to one another) a ratio the same as the given ratio."
A difficult point, however, arises on the passage of Pappus, which
says that a porism is " that which, in respect of its hypothesis, falls
short of a locus-theorem " (TOTTUCOV 0eo>prJtiaTo<;). Heiberg explains it
by comparing the porism from Apollonius' Plane Loci just given with
Pappus' enunciation of the same thing, to the effect that, if from two
given points two straight lines be drawn meeting in a point, and these
straight lines have to one another a given ratio, the point will lie on
either a straight line or a circumference of a circle given in position.
Heiberg observes that in this latter enunciation something is taken
into the hypothesis which was not in the hypothesis of the enunciation
of the porism, viz. " that the ratio of the straight lines is the same."
I confess this does not seem to me satisfactory: for there is no real
difference between the enunciations, and the supposed difference in
hypothesis is very like playing with words. Chasles s a y s : " Ce qui
constitue le porisme est ce qui manque a I'kypothese d'un tke'orime
local (en d'autres termes, le porisme est inferieur, par l'hypothese, au
theoreme local; c'est-a-dire que quand quelques parties d'une pro­
position locale n'ont pas dans l'^nonce' la determination qui leur est
propre, cette proposition cesse d'etre regardee comme un theoreme et
devient un porisme)." But the subject still seems to require further
elucidation.
While there is so much that is obscure, it seems certain ( i ) that the
Porisms were distinctly part of higher geometry and not of elementary
1

2

1

This was thus expressed by Chasles : " Le porisme est une proposition dans laquelle on
demande de d£montrer qu'une chose ou plusieurs choses sont donntes,
qui, ainsi que l'une
quelconque d'une infinite d'autres choses non donnees,,mais dont chacune est avec des choses
donnees dans une meme relation, ont une certaine propriete commune, decrite dans la pro­
position."
Commentary on Apollonius' Conies (vol. It. p. 180, ed. Heiberg).
2

