geometry, (2) that they contained propositions belonging to the
modern theory of transversals and to projective geometry. It should
be remembered too that it was in the course of his researches on this
subject that Chasles was led to the idea of anharmonic
ratios.
Lastly, allusion should be made to the theory of Zeuthen on the
subject of the porisms. H e observes that the only porjsm of which
Pappus gives the complete enunciation, " If from two given points
straight lines be drawn meeting on a straight line given in position,
and one cut off from a straight line given in position (a segment
measured) towards a given point on it, the other will also cut off from
another (straight line a segment) bearing to the first a given ratio,"
is also true if there be substituted for the first given straight line a
conic regarded as the " locus with respect to four lines," and that this
extended porism can be used for completing Apollonius' exposition
of that locus. Zeuthen concludes that the Porisms were in part by­
products of the theory of conies and in part auxiliary means for the
study of conies, and that Euclid called them b y the same name as
that applied to corollaries because they were corollaries with respect to
conies. But there appears to be no evidence to confirm this conjecture.
5.
The Surface-loci (jotroi Trpbs emtpaveia).
The two books on this subject are mentioned by Pappus as part
of the Treasury of Analysis' .
A s the other works in the list which
were on plane subjects dealt only with straight lines, circles, and
conic sections, it is a priori likely that among the loci in this treatise
(loci which are surfaces) were included such loci as were cones,
cylinders and spheres. Beyond this all is conjecture based on two
lemmas given by Pappus in connexion with the treatise.
(1) T h e first of these lemmas and the figure attached to it are
not satisfactory as they stand, but a possible restoration is indicated
by Tannery*. If the latter is right, it suggests that one of the loci
contained all the points on the elliptical parallel sections of a cylinder
and was therefore an oblique circular cylinder. Other assumptions
with regard to the conditions to which the lines in the figure may be
subject would suggest that other loci dealt with were cones regarded
as containing all points on particular elliptical parallel sections of
the cones'.
(2) In the second lemma Pappus states and gives a complete proof
of the focus-and-directrix property of a conic, viz. that the locus of a
point whose distance from a given point is in a given ratio to its distance
from a fixed line is a conic section, which is an ellipse, a parabola or a
hyperbola according as the given ratio is less than, equal to, or greater
than unity'.
T w o conjectures are possible as to the application of
this theorem in Euclid's Surface-loci,
(a) It may have been used to
prove that the locus of a point whose distance from a given straight
1

1

3

1

Die Lekre

3

Pappus, VII. p. 636.

4

5

.Bulletin

von den Kegelschnitien
des sciences

im Altertum,
3

math,

el astron.,

1° Sene, V I . 149.

Further particulars will be found in The Works

Zeuthen, Die Lthre

von den Kegelschnitten,

chapter V I I I .

Hid. vn. p. 1004.
of Archimedes,

pp. lxii—Ixiv, and in

p. 425 sqq.

* Pappus, VII. pp. 1006—1014, and Hultsch's Appendix, pp. U70—3.

