line is in a given ratio to its distance from a given plane is a certain
cone, (b) It may have been used to prove that the locus of a point
whose distance from a given point is in a given ratio to its distance
from a given plane is the surface formed by the revolution of a conic
about its major or conjugate axis . Thus Chasles may have been
correct in his conjecture that the Surface-loci dealt with surfaces of
revolution of the second degree and sections of the same'.
6. T h e Conks.
Pappus says of this lost work: " T h e four books of Euclid's Conies
were completed by Apollonius, who added four more and gave us
eight books of Conies'." It is probable that Euclid's work was lost
even by Pappus' time, for he goes on to speak of "Aristaeus, who wrote
the still extant five books of Solid Loci connected with the conies."
Speaking of the relation of Euclid's work to that of Aristaeus on conies
regarded as loci, Pappus says in a later passage (bracketed however
by Hultsch) that Euclid, regarding Aristaeus as deserving credit for
the discoveries he had already made in conies, did not (try to)
anticipate him or construct anew the same system. W e may no
doubt conclude that the book by Aristaeus on solid loci preceded
Euclid's on conies and was, at least in point of originality, more
important. Though both treatises dealt with the same subject-matter,
the object and the point of view were different; had they been the
same, Euclid could scarcely have refrained, as Pappus says he did,
from attempting to improve upon the earlier treatise. No doubt
Euclid wrote on the general theory of conies as Apollonius did, but
confined himself to those properties which were necessary for the
analysis of the Solid Loci of Aristaeus. T h e Conks of Euclid were
evidently superseded by the treatise of Apollonius.
A s regards the contents of Euclid's Conks, the most important
source of our information is Archimedes, who frequently refers to
propositions in conies as well known and not needing proof, adding
in three cases that they are proved in the " elements of conies " or in
"the conies," which expressions must clearly refer to the works of
Aristaeus and Euclid
Euclid still used the old names for the conies (sections of a rightangled, acute-angled, or obtuse-angled cone), but he was aware that
an ellipse could be obtained by cutting a cone in any manner by a
plane not parallel to the base (assuming the section to lie wholly
between the apex of the cone and its base) and also by cutting a
cylinder. This is expressly stated in a passage from the Phaenomena
of Euclid about to be mentioned .
7. T h e Pkaenomena.
This is an astronomical work and is still extant. A much inter1

4

5

1

For further details see The Works of Archimedes,
pp. lxiv, Ixv, and Zeuthen, /. c.
' Apercu historique,
pp. 273—4.
Pappus, VII. p. 672.
For details of these propositions see my Apollonius
of Perga, pp. xxxv, xxxvi.
* Phaenomena,
ed. Menge, p. 6 : " I f a cone or a cylinder be cut by a plane not
parallel to the base, the section is a section of an acute-angled cone, which is like a shield
3

4

(8vpc&s)."

