
is

IOO

and the angle FED

stands on the circumference FA

and the angle AFE

on the circumference EDCB A ;

therefore the angle AFE

BCD,

is equal to the angle

DEF.
[HI. 27]
Similarly it can be proved that the remaining angles of
the hexagon ABCDEF
are also severally equal to each of
the angles AFE, FED ;
therefore the hexagon ABCDEF

is equiangular.

But it was also proved equilateral;
and it has been inscribed in the circle

ABCDEF.

Therefore in the given circle an equilateral and equiangular
hexagon has been inscribed.
Q. E. F.
PORISM. From this it is manifest that the side of the
hexagon is equal to the radius of the circle.
And, in like manner as in the case of the pentagon, if
through the points of division on the circle we draw
tangents to the circle, there will be circumscribed about the
circle an equilateral and equiangular hexagon in conformity
with what was explained in the case of the pentagon.
And further by means similar to those explained in the
case of the pentagon we can both inscribe a circle in a given
hexagon and circumscribe one about it.
Q. E. F.
Heiberg, I think with good reason, considers the Porism to this proposition
to be referred to in the instance which Proclus (p. 304, 2) gives of a porism
following a problem. As the text of Proclus stands, "the (porism) found
in the second Book (TO &i iv rip Scvrcpu /3if}\iw Ktipavov) is a porism to a
problem "; but this is not true of the only porism that we find in the second
Book, namely the porism to 11. 4.
Hence Heiberg thinks that for T<J
Seirrtpw ptfikup should be read ™ 8' /8i/3Ai'w, i.e. the fourth Book. Moreover
Proclus speaks of the porism in the particular Book, from which we gather
that there was only one porism in Book iv. as he knew it, and therefore that
he did not regard as a porism the addition to iv. 5.
Cf. note on that
proposition.
It appears that Theon substituted for the first words of the Porism to
iv. 15 " A n d in like manner as in the case of the pentagon" (o/iot'ws 8«
TOIS « r ! TOO TrtvTayiLvov) the simple word " a n d " or "also" (««)> apparently
thinking that the words had the same meaning as the similar words lower
down. This is however not the case, the meaning being that " if, as in the
case of the pentagon, we draw tangents, we can prove, also as was done in
the case of the pentagon, that the figure so formed is a circumscribed regular
hexagon."


