
in

Here, as in in. 10, we have the term "circle" used by Euclid in its
exceptional sense of the circumference of a circle, instead of the "plane figure
contained by one line" of i. l)ef. 15. Cf. the note on that definition (Vol. 1.

pp. 184—s).
Proclus (p. 269) refers to this proposition in illustration of his statement
that Euclid gave proofs of a number of propositions with an eye to their use
in astronomy. " With regard to the last proposition in the fourth Book in
which he inscribes the side of the fifteen-angled figure in a circle, for what
object does anyone assert that he propounds it except for the reference of this
problem to astronomy ? For, when we have inscribed the fifteen-angled figure
in the circle through the poles, we have the distance from the poles both of
the equator and the zodiac, since they are distant from one another by the
side of the fifteen-angled figure." This agrees with what we know from other
sources, namely that up to the time of Eratosthenes {circa 2 8 4 - 2 0 4 B.C.) 24
was generally accepted as the correct measurement of the obliquity of the
ecliptic. This measurement, and the construction of the fifteen-angled figure,
were probably due to the Pythagoreans, though it would appear that the
former was not known to Oenopides of Chios (fl. circa 460 B.C.), as we learn
from Theon of Smyrna (pp. 198—9, ed. Hiller), who gives Dercyllides as his
authority, that Eudemus (fl. circa 320 B.C.) stated in his ao-rpoAoyiai that,
while Oenopides discovered certain things, and Thales, Anaximander and
Anaximenes others, it was the rest (01 Aowrot) who added other discoveries
to these and, among them, that " the axes of the fixed stars and of the planets
respectively are distant from one another by the side of a fifteen-angled figure."
Eratosthenes evaluated the angle to l^rds of 180% i.e. about 23° 5 1 ' 20",
which measurement was apparently not improved upon in antiquity (cf. Ptolemy,
Syntaxis, ed. Heiberg, p. 68).
Euclid has now shown how to describe regular polygons with 3, 4, 5, 6
and 15 sides. Now, when any regular polygon is given, we can construct a
regular polygon with twice the number of sides by first describing a circle
about the given polygon and then bisecting all the smaller arcs subtended by
the sides. Applying this process any number of times, we see that we can by
Euclid's methods construct regular polygons with 3.2", 4.2" 5.2", 15.2* sides,
where n is zero or any positive integer.


