CHAPTER
THE

VI.

SCHOLIA.

H E I B E R G has collected scholia, to the number of about 1500, in
Vol. V. of his edition of Euclid, and has also discussed and classified
them in a separate short treatise, in which he added a few others .
These scholia cannot be regarded as doing much to facilitate the
reading of the Elements.
A s a rule, they contain only such observa­
tions as any intelligent reader could make for himself. Among the
few exceptions are XI. Nos. 33, 35 (where XI. 22, 23 are extended to
solid angles formed by any number of plane angles), XII. No. 85
(where an assumption tacitly made by Euclid in XII. 17 is proved),
IX. Nos. 28, 29 (where the scholiast has pointed out the error in the
text of I X . 19).
Nor are they very rich in historical information ; they cannot be
compared in this respect with Proclus' commentary on Book I. or
with those of Eutocius on Archimedes and Apollonius. But even
under this head they contain some things of interest, e.g. II. No. 11
explaining that the gnomon was invented by geometers for the sake of
brevity, and that its name was suggested by an incidental characteristic,
namely that "from it the whole is known (yvmplfcrai), either of the
whole area or of the remainder, when it (the yvwfiwv) is either placed
round or taken away"; 11. No. 13, also on the gnomon; IV. No. 2
stating that Book IV. was the discovery of the Pythagoreans;
V. No. 1 attributing the content of Book V. to Eudoxus; X. No. I with
its allusion to the discovery of incommensurability by the Pytha­
goreans and to Apollonius' work on irrationals; X. No. 62 definitely
attributing X. 9 to Theaetetus; X I I I . No. I about the "Platonic" figures,
which attributes the cube, the pyramid, and the dodecahedron to the
Pythagoreans, and the octahedron and icosahedron to Theaetetus.
Sometimes the scholia are useful in connexion with the settlement
of the text, (1) directly, e.g. III. No. 16 on the interpolation of the
word "within" (eVro?) in the enunciation of III. 6, and X. No. 1
alluding to the discussion by "Theon and some others" of irrational
"surfaces" and "solids," as well as "lines," from which we may
1

1

Heiberg, Om Scholierne til Eukiids
Elementer,
Kjtfbenhavn, 1888. T h e tract is
written in Danish, but, fortunately for those w h o do not read Danish easily, the author has
appended (pp. 70—78) a resume in French.

