conclude that the scholium at the end of Book X. is not genuine;
(2) indirectly in that they sometimes throw light on the connexion
of certain M S S .
Lastly, they have their historical importance as enabling us to
judge of the state of mathematical science at the times when they
were written.
Before passing to the classification of the scholia, Heiberg remarks
that we must separate from them a number of additions in the nature
of scholia which are found in the text of our M S S . but which can, in
one way or another, be proved to be spurious. A s they are found
both in P and in the Theonine M S S . , they must have been in the M S S .
anterior to Theon (4th a). But they are, in great part, only found in
the margin of P and the Theonine M S S . ; in V they are half in the
text and half in the margin. This can hardly be explained except
on the supposition that these additions were originally (in the M S S .
before Theon-) in the margin, and that Theon kept them there in his
edition, but that they afterwards found their way gradually into the
text of P as well as of the Theonine M S S . , or were omitted altogether,
while particular M S S . have in certain places preserved the old arrange­
ment. O f such spurious additions Heiberg enumerates the following:
the axiom about equals subtracted from unequals, the last lines of the
porism to VI. 8, second porisms to V. 19 and to V I . 20, the porism
to i n . 31, VI. Def. 5, various additions in Book X., the analyses and
syntheses of XIII. 1—5, and the proposition XIII. 6.
The two first classes of scholia distinguished b y Heiberg are
denoted by the convenient abbreviations "Schol. Vat." and "Schol.
Vind."
I. Schol. V a t .
It is first necessary to set out the letters by which Heiberg
denotes certain collections of scholia.
P = Scholia in P written by the first hand.
B = Scholia in B by a hand of the same date as the M S . itself,
generally that of Arethas.
F = Scholia in F by the first hand.
Vat. = Scholia of the Vatican M S . 204 of the 10th c, which has
these scholia on leaves 198—205 (the end is missing) as an independent
collection. It does not contain the text of the Elements.
V = Scholia found on leaves 283—292 of V and written in the
same hand as that part of the M S . itself which begins at leaf 235.
Vat. 192 = a Vatican M S . of the 14th c. which contains, after
(1) the Elements I.—XIII. (without scholia), (2) the Data with scholia,
(3) Marinus on the Data, the Schol. Vat. as an independent collection
and in their entirety, beginning with I. No. 88 and ending with x m .
No. 44.
c

The Schol. Vat., the most ancient and important collection of
scholia, comprise those which are found in P B F Vat. and, from VII. 12
to IX. 15, in P B Vat. only, since in that portion of the
Elements
F was restored by a later hand without scholia; they also include I.

