INTRODUCTION

[CH.

VI

No. 88 which only happens to be erased in F, and I X . Nos. 28, 29
which may be left out because F. here has a different text. In F
and Vat. the collection ends with Book X . ; but it must also include
Schol. P B of Books X I . — x m . , since these are found along with Schol.
Vat. to Books I . — X . in several MSS. (of which V a t . 192 is one) as a
separate collection. T h e Schol. Vat. to Books X . — X I I I . are also
found in the collection V (where, curiously enough, X I I I . Nos. 43, 44
are at the beginning). T h e Schol. Vat. accordingly include Schol.
P B V Vat. 192, and doubtless also those which are found in two of
these sources. T h e total number of scholia classified by Heiberg as
Schol. Vat. is 138.
A s regards the contents of Schol. Vat. Heiberg has the following
observations. T h e thirteen scholia to Book I. are extracts made
from Proclus by a writer thoroughly conversant with the subject,
and cleverly recast (with some additions). Their author does not
seem to have had the two lacunae which our text of Proclus has
(at the end of the note on I. 36 and the beginning of the next note,
and at the beginning of the note on I. 43), for the scholia I . Nos. 125
and 137 seem to fill the gaps appropriately, at least in part. In
some passages he had better readings than our MSS. have. The rest
of Schol. Vat. (on Books I I . — x m . ) are essentially of the same
character as those on Book I., containing prolegomena, remarks on
the object of the propositions, critical remarks on the text, converses,
lemmas; they are, in general, exact and true to tradition. The
reason of the resemblance between them and Proclus appears to be
due to the fact that they have their origin in the commentary of
Pappus, of which we know that Proclus also made use. In support
of the view that Pappus is the source, Heiberg places some of the
Schol. Vat. to Book x. side by side with passages from the com­
mentary of Pappus in the Arabic translation discovered b y Woepcke ;
he also refers to the striking confirmation afforded by the fact that
X I I . No. 2 contains the solution of the problem of inscribing in a
given circle a polygon similar to a polygon inscribed in another circle,
which problem Eutocius says that Pappus gave in his commentary
on the Elements.
But, on the other hand, Schol. V a t . contain some things which
cannot have come from Pappus, e.g. the allusion in X . No. 1 to Theon
and irrational surfaces and solids, Theon being later than Pappus;
I I I . No. 10 about porisms
is more like Proclus' treatment of the
subject than Pappus', though one expression recalls that of Pappus
about forming
( ( T ^ / w i T i f e o - r J a t ) the enunciations of porisms like those
of either theorems or problems.
T h e Schol. Vat. give us important indications as regards the
text of the Elements as Pappus had it. In particular, they show that
he could not have had in his text certain of the lemmas in Book X .
For example, three of these are identical with what we find in Schol.
c

C

1

2

1

Om Sckolicmc til Euklids Elementer,
p p . n , i f : cf. Euklid-Studien,
W o e p c k e , Memoires frtsent. & fAcad. des Sciences, 1856, XIV. p. 658 sqq.
* Archimedes, ed. Heiberg, m . p . 1 8 , 1 9 — 1 5 .

pp. 170, 1 7 1 ;

