Vat. (the lemma to x. 17 = Schol. X . No. 106, and the lemmas to
X. 54,60 come in Schol. X . No. 328); and it is not possible to suppose,
that these lemmas, if they were already in the text, would also be
given as scholia. O f these three lemmas, that before X . 60 has
already been condemned for other reasons; the other two, un­
objectionable in themselves, must be rejected on the ground now
stated. There were four others against which Heiberg found nothing
to urge when writing his prolegomena to Vol. v., viz. the lemmas
before X . 42, X . 14, X . 22 and X . 33. Of these, the lemma to X . 22
is not reconcilable with Schol. X . No. 161, which takes up the
assumption in the text of Eucl. X . 22 as if no lemma had gone before.
The lemma to X . 42, which, on account of the words introducing it
(see p. 60 above), Heiberg at first hesitated to regard as an inter­
polation, is identical with Schol. X . No. 270. It is true that in
Schol. X . No. 269 we find the words "this lemma has been proved
before (iv TOK efnrpoa-Oev), but it shall also be proved now for
convenience' sake (TOV erol^ov evexa)" and it is possible to suppose
that " before" may mean in Euclid's text before x. 42; but a proof
in that place would surely have been as "convenient" as could be
desired, and it is therefore more probable that the proof had been
given by Pappus in some earlier place. (It may be added that the
lemma to x. 14, which is identical with the lemma to x i . 23, con­
demned on other grounds, is for that reason open to suspicion.)
Heiberg's conclusion is that all the lemmas are spurious, and that
most or all of them have found their way into the text from Pappus'
commentary, though at a time anterior to Theon's edition, since
they are found in all our M S S . This enables us to fix a date for these
interpolations, namely the first half of the 4th c.
Of course Pappus had not in his text the interpolations which,
from the fact of their appearing only in some of our M S S . , are seen to
be later than those above-mentioned. Such are the lemmas which
are found in the text of V only after x. 29 and X . 31 respectively and
are given in Heiberg's Appendix to Book X . (numbered 10 and 11).
On the other hand it appears from Woepcke's tract that Pappus
already had x. 115 in his t e x t : though it does not follow from this
that the proposition is genuine but only that interpolations began
very early.
Theon interpolated a proposition (or lemma) between X . 12 and
x. 13 (No. 5 in Heiberg's Appendix). Schol. Vat. has the same
thing (x. No. 125). T h e writer of the scholia therefore did not find
this lemma in the text. Schol. Vat. I X . Nos. 28, 29 show that neither
did he find in his text the alterations which Theon made in Eucl. I X .
19; the scholia in fact only agree with the text of P, not with Theon's.
This suggests that Schol. Vat. were written for use with a M S . of the
ante-Theonine recension such as P is. This probability is further
confirmed by a certain independence which P shows in several places
when compared with the Theonine M S S . Not only has P better
readings in some passages, but more substantial divergences; and,
1

1

W o e p c k e , op. cit. p. 702.

