in particular, the absence in P of three notes of a historical character
which are added, wholly or partly from Proclus, in the Theonine M S S .
attests an independent and more primitive point of view in P.
In view of the distinctive character of P, it is possible that some
of the scholia found in it in the first hand, but not in the other
sources of Schol. Vat., also belong to that collection; and several
circumstances confirm this. Schol. x m . No. 45, found in P only,
which relates to a passage in Eucl. XIII. 13, shows that certain words
in the text, though older than Theon, are interpolated; and, as the
scholium is itself older than Theon, is headed " third lemma," and
follows a " second lemma" relating to a passage in the text im­
mediately preceding, which "second lemma" belongs to Schol. Vat.
and is taken from Pappus, the "third" in all probability came from
Pappus also. T h e same is true of Schol. XII. No. 72 and x m . No. 69,
which are respectively identical with the propositions vulgo XI. 38
(Heiberg, A p p . to Book XI., No. 3) and XIII. 6; for both of these
interpolations are older than Theon. Moreover most of the scholia
which P in the first hand alone has are of the same character as
Schol. Vat. Thus VII. No. 7 and x m . No. 1 introducing Books VII.
and XIII. respectively are of the same historical character as several
of Schol. V a t . ; that VII. No. 7 appears in the text of P at the
beginning of Book VII. constitutes no difficulty. There are a number
of converses, remarks on the relation of propositions to one another,
explanations such as XII. No. 89 in which it is remarked that <I>, f l
in Euclid's figure to XII. 17 (Z, V in my figure) are really the same
point but that this makes no difference in the proof. T w o other
Schol. P on XII. 17 are connected by their headings with x n . No. 72
mentioned above.
X I . No. 10 (P) is only another form of XI.
No. 11 ( B ) ; and B often, alone with P, has preserved Schol. Vat.
On the whole Heiberg considers some 40 scholia found in P alone to
belong to Schol. Vat.
The history of Schol. V a t . appears to have been, in its main
outlines, the following. T h e y were put together after 500 A . D . , since
they contain extracts from Proclus, to which we ought not to assign
a date too near to that of Proclus' work itself; and they must at least
be earlier than the latter half of the 9th c, in which B was written.
A s there must evidently have been several intermediate links between
the archetype and B, we must assign them rather to the first half of
the period between the two dates, and it is not improbable that they
were a new product of the great development of mathematical studies
at the end of the 6th c. (Isidorus of Miletus). T h e author extracted
what he found of interest in the commentary of Proclus on Book I.
and in that of Pappus on the rest of the work, and put these extracts
in the margin of a M S . of the class of P. A s there are no scholia to
I. 1—22, the first leaves of the archetype or of one of the earliest
copies must have been lost at an early date, and it was from that
mutilated copy that partly P and partly a M S . of the Theonine class
were taken, the scholia being put in the margin in both. Then the
collection spread through the Theonine M S S . , gradually losing some

