scholia which could not be read or understood, or which were
accidentally or deliberately omitted. N e x t it was extracted from
one of these MSS. and made into a separate work which has been
preserved, in part, in its entirety (Vat. 192 etc.) and, in part, divided
into sections, so that the scholia to Books x . — x m . were detached
(V ).
It had the same fate in the MSS. which kept the original
arrangement (in the margin), and in consequence there are some MSS.
where the scholia to the stereometric Books are missing, those Books
having come to be less read in the period of decadence. It is from
one of these MSS. that the collection was extracted as a separate work
such as we find it in Vat. (10th c).
c

II.

T h e second great division of the scholia is Schol. V i n d .

This title is taken from the Viennese MS. (V), and the letters used
by Heiberg to indicate the sources here in question are as follows.
V = scholia in V written by the same hand that copied the MS.
itself from fol. 235 onward.
q = scholia of the Paris MS. 2344 (q) written by the first hand.
1 = scholia of the Florence MS. Laurent. XXVIII, 2 written in the
13th—14th c , mostly in the first hand, but partly in two later
hands.
V = scholia in V written by the same hand as the first part
(leaves I—183) of the MS. itself; V wrote his scholia after V*.
q = scholia of the Paris MS. (q) found here and there in another
hand of early date.
a

b

b

1

Schol. Vind. include scholia found in V q . 1 is nearly related to
q ; and in fact the three MSS. which, so far as Euclid's text is con­
cerned, show no direct interdependence, are, as regards their scholia,
derived from one original. Heiberg proves this by reference to the
readings of the three in two passages (found in Schol. I. No. 109 and
X. No. 39 respectively). T h e common source must have contained,
besides the scholia found in the three MSS. V ql, those also which
are contained in two of them, for it is more unlikely that two of the
three should contain common interpolations than that a particular
scholium should drop out of one of them. Besides V" and q, the
scholia V and q must equally be referred to Schol. Vind., since the
greater part of their scholia are found in 1. There is a lacuna in q
from Eucl. VIII. 25 to IX. 14, so that for this portion of the
Elements
Schol. Vind. are represented by VI only. Heiberg gives about 450
numbers in all as belonging to this collection.
Schol. Vind. did not all come from one source; this is shown b y
differences of substance, e.g. between X. Nos. 36 and 39, and by
differences of time of writing: e.g. vi. No. 52 refers at the beginning
to No. 55 with the words "as the scholium has it" and is therefore
later than that scholium ; X. No. 247 is also later than X. No. 246.
The scholia to Book I. are here also extracts from Proclus, but
more copious and more verbatim than in Schol. Vat. T h e author
has not always understood Proclus; and he had a text as bad as
that of our MSS., with the same lacunae. T h e scholia to the other
a

a

b

1

