Books are partly drawn ( i ) from Schol. V a t , the M S S . representing
Schol. Vind. and Schol. Vat. in these cases showing nearly all possible
combinations; but there is no certain trace in Schol. Vind. of the
scholia peculiar to P. T h e author used a copy of Schol. Vat. in the
form in which they were attached to the Theonine t e x t ; thus Schol.
Vind. correspond to B F Vat., where these diverge from P, and
especially closely to B. Besides Schol. Vat., the editors of Schol.
Vind. used (2) other old collections of scholia of which we find traces
in B and F ; Schol. Vind. have also some scholia common with b.
T h e scholia which Schol. Vind. have in common with B F come from
two different sources, and were apparently afterwards introduced
into the other M S S . ; one result of this is that several scholia are
reproduced twice.
But, besides the scholia derived from these sources, Schol. Vind.
contain a large number of others of late date, characterised by in­
correct language or by triviality of content (there are many examples
in numbers, citations of propositions used, absurd diropuu, and the
like). Unlike Schol. Vat., these scholia often quote words from Euclid
as a heading (in one case a heading is inserted in Schol. Vind. where
a scholium without the heading is quoted from Schol. Vat., see V .
No. 14). T h e explanations given often presuppose very little know­
ledge on the part of the reader and frequently contain obscurities
and gross errors.
Schol. Vind. were collected for use with a M S . of the Theonine
class; this follows from the fact that they contain a note on the
proposition vulgo V I I . 22 interpolated by Theon (given in Heiberg's
A p p . to Vol. II. p. 430). Since the scholium to V I I . 39 given in V and
p in the text after the title of Book V I I I . quotes the proposition as
V I I . 39, it follows that this scholium must have been written before
the interpolation of the two propositions vulgo V I I . 20, 22 ; Schol.
Vind. contain ( V H . No. 80) the first sentence of it, but without the
heading referring to V I I . 39. Schol. V I I . No. 97 quotes V I I . 33 as
V I I . 34, so that the proposition vulgo V I I . 22 may have stood in the
scholiast's text but not the later interpolation vulgo v n . 20 (later
because only found in B in the margin by the first hand). Of course
the scholiast had also the interpolations earlier than Theon.
For the date of the collection we have a lower limit in the date
(12th c.) of M S S . in which the scholia appear. That it was not much
earlier than the 12th c. is indicated (1) by the poverty of its contents,
(2) by the quality of the M S . of Proclus which was used in the
compilation of it (the Munich M S . used by Friedlein with which the
scholiast's excerpts are essentially in agreement belongs to the I ith—
12th a), (3) by the fact that Schol. Vind. appear only in M S S . of the
12th c. and no trace of them is found in our M S S . belonging to
the 9th—10th c. in which Schol. Vat. are found. T h e collection may
therefore probably be assigned to the 1.1th c. Perhaps it may be in
part due to Psellus who lived towards the end of that century: for in
a Florence M S . (Magliabecch. X I , 53 of the 15th c.) containing a
mathematical compendium intended for use in the reading of Aristotle

