INTRODUCTION

[CH.

VI

added the greater part of Schol. Vind., partly in the margin and
partly on pieces of leaves stitched on.
Our sources for Schol. Vat. also contain other elements. In P
there were introduced a certain number of extracts from Proclus, to
supplement Schol. Vat. to Book I . ; they are all written with a
different ink from that used for the oldest part of the MS., and the
text is inferior. There are additions in the other sources of Schol.
Vat. ( F and B) which point to a common source for F B and which
are nearly all found in other M S S . , and, in particular, in Schol. Vind.,
which also used the same source; that they are not assignable to
Schol. Vat. results only from their not being found in Vat. O f other
additions in F, some are peculiar to F and some common to it and b;
but they are not original. F (scholia in a later hand in F) contains
three original scholia; the rest come from V . B contains, besides
scholia common to it and F, b or other sources, several scholia which
seem to have been put together by Arethas, who wrote at least a part
of them with his own hand.
Heiberg has satisfied himself, by a closer study of b, that the
scholia which he denotes by b, {$ and b are by one hand ; they are
mostly to be found in other sources as well, though some are original.
By the same hand (Theodorus Cabasilas, 15th c.) are also the scholia
denoted by b , B , b and B . These scholia come in great part from
Schol. Vind., and in making these extracts Theodorus probably used
one of our sources, 1, mistakes in which often correspond to those of
Theodorus. T o one scholium is attached the name of Demetrius (who
must be Demetrius Cydonius, a friend of Nicolaus Cabasilas, 14th c ) ;
but it could not have been written by him, since it appears in B an'd
Schol. Vind.
Nor are all the scholia which bear the name of
Theodorus due to Theodorus himself, though some are so.
A s B (a late hand in B) contains several of the original scholia of
b , B must have used b itself as his source, and, as all the scholia in
B are in b, the latter is also the source of the scholia in B which are
found in other M S S . B and b were therefore, in the 15th c, in the
hands of the same person; this explains, too, the fact that b in a late
hand has some scholia which can only come from B. We arrive then
at the conclusion that Theodorus Cabasilas, in the 15 th c, owned both
the M S S . B and b, and that he transferred to B scholia which he had
before written in b, either independently or after other sources, and
inversely transferred some scholia from B to b. Further, B are
earlier than Theodorus Cabasilas, who certainly himself wrote B' as
well as b and b .
A n author's name is also attached to the scholia V I . No. 6 and
X . No. 223, which are attributed to Maximus Planudes (end of 13th c.)
along with scholia on I. 31, x. 14 and x. 18 found in 1 in a quite late
hand and published on pp. 46, 47 of Heiberg's dissertation. These
seem to have been taken from lectures of Planudes on the Elements
by a pupil who used 1 as his copy.
There are also in 1 two other Byzantine scholia, written by a late
hand, and bearing the names Ioannes and Pediasimus respectively;
2

1

2

2

3

3

3

2

s

3

3

2

2

3

