these must in like manner have been written by a pupil after lectures
of Ioannes Pediasimus (first half of 14th c ) , and this pupil must also
have used 1.
Before these scholia were edited by Heiberg, very few of them had
been published in the original Greek. T h e Basel editio princeps has a
few (v. No. 1, vi. Nos. 3, 4 and some in Book X.) which are taken,
some from the Paris MS. (Paris. Gr. 2343) used by Grynaeus, others
probably from the Venice MS. (Marc. 301) also used by him; one
published by Heiberg, not in his edition of Euclid but in his paper
on the scholia, may also be from Venet. 301, but appears also in
Paris. Gr. 2342.
T h e scholia in the Basel edition passed into the
Oxford edition in the text, and were also given b y August in the
Appendix to his Vol. 11.
Several specimens of the two series of scholia (Vat. and Vind.)
were published by C. Wachsmuth (Rhein. Mus. XVIII. p. 132 sqq.)
and by Knoche (Untersuchungen iiber die neu aufgefundenen
Scholien
des Proklus, Herford, 1865).
The scholia published in Latin were much more numerous. G.
Valla (De expetendis et fugiendis
rebus, 1501) reproduced apparently
some 200 of the scholia included in Heiberg's edition. Several of
these he obtained from two Modena MSS. which at one time were
in his possession (Mutin. Ill B, 4 and II E , 9, both of the 15th c.);
but he must have used another source as well, containing extracts
from other series of scholia, notably Schol. Vind. with which he has
some 87 scholia in common. He has also several that are new.
Commandinus included in his translation under the title " Scholia
antiqua" the greater part of the Schol. Vat. which he certainly
obtained from a MS. of the class of Vat. 192; on the whole he
adhered closely to the Greek text. Besides these scholia Com­
mandinus has the scholia and lemmas which he found in the Basel
editio princeps, and also three other scholia not belonging to Schol.
Vat., as well as one new scholium (to XII. 13) not included in
Heiberg's edition, which are distinguished by different type and were
doubtless taken from the Greek MS. used by him along with the
Basel edition.
In Conrad Dasypodius' Lexicon mathematicutn
published in 1573
there is (on fol. 42—44) " Graecum scholion in definitiones Euclidis
libri quinti elementorum appendicis loco propter pagellas vacantes
annexum."
This contains four scholia, and part of two others,
published in Heiberg's edition, with some variations of readings, and
with some new matter added (for which see pp. 64—6 of Heiberg's
pamphlet). T h e source of these scholia is revealed to us by another
work of Dasypodius, Isaaci Monachi Scholia in Euclidis
elementorum
geometriae sex priores libros per C. Dasypodium
in latinum
sermonem
translata
et in lucem edita (1579).
This work contains, besides
excerpts from Proclus on Book I. (in part closely related to Schol.
Vind.), some 30 scholia included in Heiberg's edition, several new
scholia, and the above-mentioned scholia to the definitions of Book V.
published in Greek in 1573. After the scholia follow " Isaaci Monachi

