prolegomena in Euclidis Elementorum geometriae libros" (two
definitions of geometry) and " Varia miscellanea ad geometriae cognitionem necessaria ab Isaaco Monacho collecta " (mostly the same as
pp. 252, 24—272, 27 in the Variae Collectiones included in Hultsch's
Heron); lastly, a note of Dasypodius to the reader says that these
scholia were taken " ex clarissimi viri Joannis Sambuci antiquo codice
manu propria Isaaci Monachi scripto." Isaak Monachus is doubtless
Isaak Argyrus, 14th c. ; and Dasypodius used a M S . in which, besides
the passage in Hultsch's Variae Collectiones, there were a number of
scholia marked in the margin with the name of Isaak (cf. those in b
under the name of Theodorus Cabasilas). Whether the new scholia
are original cannot be decided until they are published in Greek ; but
it is not improbable that they are at all events independent arrange­
ments of older scholia. A l l but five of the others, and all but one of
the Greek scholia to Book v., are taken from Schol. V a t . ; three of the
excepted ones are from Schol. Vind., and the other three seem to
come from F (where some words of them are illegible, but can be
supplied by means of Mut. I l l B, 4, which has these three scholia and
generally shows a certain likeness to Isaak's scholia).
Dasypodius also published in 1564 the arithmetical commentary
of Barlaam the monk (14th c.) on Eucl. Book I I . , which finds a place
in Appendix I V . to the Scholia in Heiberg's edition.
Hultsch has some remarks on the origin of the scholia .
He
observes that the scholia to Book I . contain a considerable portion
of Geminus' commentary on the definitions and are specially valuable
because they contain extracts from Geminus only, whereas Proclus,
though drawing mainly upon him, quotes from others as well. O n the
postulates and axioms the scholia give more than is found in Proclus.
Hultsch conjectures that the scholium on Book v., No. 3, attributing
the discovery of the theorems to Eudoxus but their arrangement to
Euclid, represents the tradition going back to Geminus, and that the
scholium X I I I . , No. I , has the same origin.
A word should be added about the numerical illustrations of
Euclid's propositions in the scholia to Book x. T h e y contain a large
number of calculations with sexagesimal fractions'; the fractions go
as far as fourth-sixtieths
(1/60 ). Numbers expressed in these fractions
are handled with skill and include some results of surprising accuracy*
1

4

1

A r t . " E u k l e i d e s " in Pauly-Wissowa's
Real-Encyclopadic.
Hultsch has written upon these in Bibliothcca Mdthematica, v , 1904, pp. 2 2 5 — 1 3 3 .
T h u s s/(i7) is given (allowing for a slight correction by means of the context) as 5 1 1 '
46" 10"', which gives for V 3 the value 1 43 55" 23"', being the same value as that given by
Hipparchus in his T a b l e of Chords, and correct to the seventh decimal place. Similarly ^ 8
is given as 2 49' 42" 20"' 10"", which is equivalent to / 2 = 1*41421335. Hultsch gives
instances of the various operations, addition, subtraction, etc., carried out in these fractions,
and shows how the extraction of the square root was effected. Cf. T . L . H e a t h , History of
Greek Mathematics,
1., pp. 59—63.
2

8

8

N

