CHAPTER

IV.
1

PROCLUS AND HIS SOURCES .
IT is well known that the commentary of Proclus on Eucl. Book I.
is one of the two main sources of information as to the history of
Greek geometry which we possess, the other being the Collection of
Pappus. They are the more precious because the original works of
the forerunners of Euclid, Archimedes and Apollonius are lost, having
probably been discarded and forgotten almost immediately after the
appearance of the masterpieces of that great trio.
Proclus himself lived 410-485 A.D., so that there had already
passed a sufficient amount of time for the tradition relating to the
pre-Euclidean geometers to become obscure and defective. In this
connexion a passage is quoted from Simplicius* who, in his account
of the quadrature of certain lunes b y Hippocrates of Chios, while
mentioning two authorities for his statements, Alexander Aphrodisiensis (about 220 A.D.) and Eudemus, says in one place*, " A s
regards Hippocrates of Chios we must pay more attention to Eudemus,
since he was nearer the times, being a pupil of Aristotle."
The importance therefore of a critical examination of Proclus'
commentary with a view to determining from what original sources
he drew need not be further emphasised.
Proclus received his early training in Alexandria, where Olympiodorus was his instructor in the works of Aristotle, and mathematics
was taught him by one Heron (of course a different Heron from the
•'mechanicus Hero" of whom we have already spoken). H e after­
wards went to Athens where he was imbued by Plutarch, and by
Syrianus, with the Neo-Platonic philosophy, to which he then devoted
4

1

My task in this chapter is made easy by the appearance, in the nick of time, of the
dissertation De Prodi
fontibus
by J. G. van Pesch (Lugduni-Batavorum, Apud L. van
Nifterik, MDCCCC). The chapters dealing directly with the subject show a thorough
acquaintance on the part of the author with all the literature bearing on it; he covers
the whole field and he exercises a sound and sober judgment in forming his conclusions.
The same cannot always be said of his only predecessor in the same inquiry, Tannery
(in La Ghmitrie
grecque,
1887), who often robs his speculations of much of their value
through his proneness to run away with an idea; he does so in this case, basing most of his
conclusions on an arbitrary and unwarranted assumption as to the significance of the words
ol real run. (e.g. "Haunt, noo-ettiinov
etc) as used in Proclus.
* Simplicius on Aristotle's Physics,
ed. Diets, pp. 54—69.
• ibid. p. 68, 3».
Cf. Martin, Reckerches
4

sur la vie et les ouvrages

d'Hiron

d*Alexandrit,

pp. 340—a.

