heart and soul, becoming one of its most prominent exponents. He
speaks everywhere with the highest respect of his masters, and
was in turn regarded with extravagant veneration by his contem­
poraries, as we learn from Marinus his pupil and biographer. On
the death of Syrianus he was put at the head of the Neo-Platonic
school. He was a man of untiring industry, as is shown by the
number of books which he wrote, including a large number of com­
mentaries, mostly on the dialogues of Plato. He was an acute
dialectician, and pre-eminent among his contemporaries in the
range of his learning ; he was a competent mathematician ; he was
even a poet. A t the same time he was a believer in all sorts of
myths and mysteries and a devout worshipper of divinities both
Greek and Oriental.
Though he was a competent mathematician, he was evidently
much more a philosopher than a mathematician . This is shown
even in his commentary on Eucl. I., where, not only in the Prologues
(especially the first), but also in the notes themselves, he seizes any
opportunity for a philosophical digression. He says himself that he
attaches most importance to "the things which require deeper study
and contribute to the sum of philosophy "; alternative proofs, cases,
and the like (though he gives many) have no attraction for him ;
and, in particular, he attaches no value to the addition of Heron to
I. 47 , which is of considerable mathematical interest. Though he
esteemed mathematics highly, it was only as a handmaid to philosophy.
H e quotes Plato's opinion to the effect that "mathematics, as making
use of hypotheses, falls short of the non-hypothetical and perfect
science "..."Let us then not say that Plato excludes mathematics
from the sciences, but that he declares it to be secondary to the one
supreme science ." A n d again, while "mathematical science must be
considered desirable in itself, though not with reference to the needs
of daily life," "if it is necessary to refer the benefit arising from it to
something else, we must connect that benefit with intellectual know­
ledge (voepav yvaxriv), to which it leads the way and is a propaedeutic,
clearing the eye of the soul and taking away the impediments which
the senses place in the way of the knowledge of universals (TWV
iXoyv) ."
W e know that in the Neo-Platonic school the younger pupils
learnt mathematics; and it is clear that Proclus taught this subject,
and that this was the origin of the commentary. Many passages
show him as a master speaking to scholars. Thus "we have illustrated
1

2

3

4

5

8

7

1

Zeller calls him "Der Gelehrte, dem kein Feld damaligen Wissens verschlossen ist."
Van Pesch observes that in his commentaries on the Timaeus
(pp. 671—2) he speaks
as no real mathematician could have spoken. In the passage referred to the question is
whether the sun occupies a middle place among the planets. Proclus rejects the view of
Hipparchus and Ptolemy because "6 ffeovpybs" (sc. the Chaldean, says Zeller) thinks otherwise,
" whom it is not lawful to disbelieve." Martin says rather neatly, " Pour Proclus, les
Elements d'Euclide ont l'heureuse chance de n'elre contredits ni par les Oracles chaldaiques,
ni par les speculations des pythagoriciens anciens et nouveaux
"
Proclus, p. 84, 13.
ibid. p. 429, 12.
8

8

4

8

ibid.

7

ibid. p. 27, 27 to 28, 7 ; cf. also p. 21, 25, pp. 46, 47.

p. 31, 20.

6

ibid.

p. 32,

2.

