and made plain all these things in the case of the first problem, but
it is necessary that my hearers should make the same inquiry as
regards the others as well ," and " I do not indicate these things as a
merely incidental matter but as preparing its beforehand for the
doctrine of the Timaeus ."
Further, the pupils whom he was
addressing were beginners in mathematics ; for in one place he says
that he omits " for the present" to speak of the discoveries of those
who employed the curves of Nicomedes and Hippias for trisecting
an angle, and of those who used the Archimedean spiral for dividing
an angle in any given ratio, because these things would be too
difficult for beginners (hvadea>pt)rovi TOK elaayop.evoc<i) . Again, if
his pupils had not been beginners, it would not have been necessary
for Proclus to explain what is meant by saying that sides subtend
certain angles , the difference between adjacent and vertical angles
etc., or to exhort them, as he often does, to work out other particular
cases for themselves, for practice (yvp.va<rta<; eveta)*.
The commentary seems then to have been founded on Proclus'
lectures to beginners in mathematics. But there are signs that it
was revised and re-edited for a larger public ; thus he gives notice in
one place " to those who shall come upon " his work (TOK ivrev^opevoK).
There are also passages which could not have been under­
stood by the beginners to whom he lectured, e.g. passages about the
cylindrical helix , conchoids and cissoids . These passages may have
been added in the revised edition, or, as van Pesch conjectures, the
explanations given in the lectures may have been much fuller and
more comprehensible to beginners, and they may have been shortened
on revision.
In his comments on the propositions of Euclid, Proclus generally
proceeds in this w a y : first he gives explanations regarding Euclid's
proofs, secondly he gives a few different cases, mainly for the sake of
practice, and thirdly he addresses himself to refuting objections
raised by cavillers to particular propositions. T h e latter class of
note he deems necessary because of " sophistical cavils" and the
attitude of the people who rejoiced in finding paralogisms and in
causing annoyance to scientific men . His commentary does not
seem to have been written for the purpose of correcting or improving
Euclid. For there are very few passages of mathematical content
in which Proclus can be supposed to be propounding anything of his
own; nearly all are taken from the works of others, mostly earlier
commentators, so that, for the purpose of improving on or correcting
Euclid, there was no need for his commentary at all. Indeed only in
one place does he definitely bring forward anything of his own to get
over a difficulty which he finds in E u c l i d ; this is where he tries to
1

2

3

4

8

7

8

9

10

11

I

Proclus, p. 210, 18.

2

8

ibid. p. 272, i t .
ibid. p. 198, 14.
ibid. p. 84, 9.
ibid. p. 1 1 3 .

4

8

7

8

II

ibid. pp. 368—373.

ibid.
ibid.

p. 384,
p. 238,

2.
12.

8

Cf. p. 224, 15 (on I. 2).

8

ibid.
ibid.

1 0

p. 105.
p. 375, 8.

