prove the parallel-postulate, after first giving Ptolemy's attempt and
then pointing out objections to it. On the other hand, there are a
number of passages in which he extols Euclid; thrice also he supports
Euclid against Apollonius where the latter had given proofs which he
considered better than Euclid's (i. 10, 11, and 23).
Allusion must be made to the debated question whether Proclus
continued his commentaries beyond Book I. His intention to do so
is clear from the following passages. Just after the words above
quoted about the trisection etc. of an angle by means of certain curves
he says, " For we may perhaps more appropriately examine these
things on the third book, where the writer of the Elements bisects a
given circumference ." Again, after saying that of all parallelograms
which have the same perimeter the square is the greatest " and the
rhomboid least of all," he adds: " But this we will prove in another
place ; for it is more appropriate to the (discussion of the) hypotheses
of the second book ." Lastly, when alluding (on I. 45) to the squaring
of the circle, and to Archimedes' proposition that any circle is equal
to the right-angled triangle in which the perpendicular is equal to the
radius of the circle and the base to its perimeter, he adds, "But of this
elsewhere "; this may imply.an intention to treat of the subject on
Eucl. XII., though Heiberg doubts it". But it is clear that, at the time
when the commentary on Book I. was written, Proclus had not yet
begun to write on the other Books and was uncertain whether he
would be able to do s o : for at the end he says", " F o r my part, if I
should be able to discuss the other books' in the same manner, I
should give thanks to the g o d s ; but, if other cares should draw me
away, I beg those who are attracted by this subject to complete the
exposition of the other books as well, following the same method, and
addressing themselves throughout to the deeper and better defined
questions involved" (TO TTpaypaTeimBet iravraxov Kal evSiaiperov
1

2

3

4

peraSioiKOVTa';).

There is in fact no satisfactory evidence that Proclus did actually
write any more commentaries than that on Book I . T h e contrary
view receives support from two facts pointed out by Heiberg, viz. (1)
that the scholiast's copy of Proclus was not so much better than our
8

1

Proclus, p. 280, 9 ; p. 282, 2 0 ; pp. 335, 336.
- ibid. p. 272, 14.
ibid. p. 398, 18.
ibid. p. 423, 6.
Heiberg, Euklid-Studien,
p. 165, note.
Proclus, p. 432, 9.
The words in the Greek are : el fiev Svv7}0elrjfiev nai rots XOITOH TOV aiirbv Tpbvov l£e\deiv.
For i^e\6eiv Heiberg would read iire^eXdelv.
True, a Vatican MS. has a collection of scholia on Books 1. (extracts from the extant
commentary of Proclus), I I . , v., VI., x. headed Eis TO. EuKKeiSov oroixeTa irpo\a/j.^av6p.eva 4K
T&V Up6K\ov.<riropa8rjv Kal K<XT' iirnop.-h.v. Heiberg holds that this title itself suggests that the
authorship of Proclus was limited to the scholia on Book I . ; for •KpoXo.p.pavbp.tva 4K TWV
WpbxXov suits extracts from Proclus' prologues,
but hardly scholia to later Books. Again, a
certain scholium (Heiberg in Hermes,
x x x v m . , 1903, p. 341, No. 17) purports to quote
words from the end of "a scholium of Proclus" on x. 9. The words quoted are from the
scholium x. No. 62, one of the Scholia Vaticana. But none of the other, older, sources
connect Proclus' name with x. No. 62 ; it is probable therefore that a Byzantine, who had in
his MS. of Euclid the collection of Schol. Vat. and knew that those on Book 1. came from
Proclus, himself attached Proclus' name to the others.
3

4

8

8

7

8

