MSS. as to suggest that the scholiast had further commentaries of
Proclus which have vanished for u s ; (2) that there is no trace in the
scholia of the notes which Proclus promised in the passages quoted
above.
Coming now to the question of the sources of Proclus, we may say
that everything goes to show that his commentary is a compilation,
though a compilation "in the better sense" of the term . He does not
even give us to understand that we shall find in it much of his own ;
" let us," he says, " now turn to the exposition of the theorems proved
by Euclid, selecting the more subtle of the comments made on them
by the ancient writers, and cutting down their interminable diffuseness... " : not a word about anything of his own. A t the same time,
he seems to imply that he will not necessarily on each occasion quote
the source of each extract from an earlier commentary; and, in fact,
while he quotes the name of his authority in many places, especially
where the subject is important, in many others, where it is equally
certain that he is not giving anything of his own, he mentions no
authority. Thus he quotes Heron by name six times; but we now
know, from the commentary of an-Nairizi, that a number of other
passages, where he mentions no name, are taken from Heron, and
among them the. not unimportant addition of an alternative proof to
I. 19. Hence we can by no means conclude that, where no authority
is mentioned, Proclus is giving notes of his own. T h e presumption is
generally the other w a y ; and it is often possible to arrive at a con­
clusion, either that a particular note is not Proclus' own, or that it
is definitely attributable to someone else, by applying the ordinary
principles of criticism. Thus, where the note shows an unmistakable
affinity to another which Proclus definitely attributes to some com­
mentator by name, especially when both contain some peculiar and
distinctive idea, we cannot have much doubt in assigning both to the
same commentator . Again, van Pesch finds a criterion in the form
of a note, where the explanation is so condensed as to be only just
intelligible; the note is that in which a converse of I. 32 is proved
the proposition namely that a rectilineal figure which has all its in­
terior angles together equal to two right angles is a triangle.
It is not safe to attribute a passage to Proclus himself because he
uses the first person in such expressions as " I say " or " I will prove "
—for he was in the habit of putting into his own words the substance
of notes borrowed from others—nor because, in speaking of an
1

2

8

4

8

1

While one class of scnuua (Schol. Vat.) have some better readings than our MSS. of
Proclus have, and partly fill up the gaps at i. 36, 37 and 1. 41—43, the other class (Schol.
Vind.) derive from an inferior Proclus MS. which also had the same lacunae.
2

mental

Knoche, Untersuchungen

uber

des

Proklus

Diattoehus

Commentar

zu

EuklicTs

Ele­

(1862), p. 1 [.
Proclus, p. 200, 10—13.
Instances of the application of this criterion will be found in the discussion of Proclus'
indebtedness to the commentaries of Heron, Porphyry and Pappus.
Van Pesch attributes this converse and proof to Pappus, arguing from the fact that the
proof is followed by a passage which, on comparison with Pappus' note on the postulate that
all right angles are equal, he feels justified in assigning to Pappus. I doubt if the evidence is
sufficient.
3

4

8

