objection raised to a particular proposition, he uses such expressions
as "perhaps someone may object" (to-aj? «5' av rives ivcrralev...): for
sometimes other words in the same passage.indicate that the objection
had actually been taken by someone . Speaking generally, we shall
not be justified in concluding that Proclus is stating something new of
his own unless he indicates this himself in express terms.
A s regards the form of Proclus' references to others by name, van
Pesch notes that he very seldom mentions the particular toork from
which he is borrowing. If we leave out of account the references to
Plato's dialogues, there are only the following references to books:
the Bacchae of Philolaus , the Symmikta of Porphyry", Archimedes On
the Sphere and Cylinder*, Apollonius On the coch/ias", a book by
Eudemus on T-he Angle", a whole book of Posidonius directed against
Zeno of the Epicurean sect , Carpus' Astronomy", Eudemus' History of
Geometry', and a tract by Ptolemy on the parallel-postulate .
Again, Proclus does not always indicate that he is quoting some­
thing at second-hand. H e often does so, e.g. he quotes Heron as the
authority for a statement about Philippus, Eudemus as attributing a
certain theorem to Oenopides etc.; but he says on I. 12 that " Oenopides first investigated this problem, thinking it useful for astronomy "
when he cannot have had Oenopides' work before him.
It has been said above that Proclus was in the habit of stating in
his own words the substance of the things which he borrowed. W e
are prepared for this when we find him stating that he will select the
best things from ancient commentaries and " cut short their intermin­
able diffuseness," that he will " briefly describe " (crvvTopM'i
icrropr)aai)
the other proofs of I. 20 given by Heron and Porphyry and also the
proofs of I. 25 by Menelaus and Heron. But the best evidence is of
course to be found in the passages where he quotes works still extant,
e.g. those of Plato, Aristotle and Plotinus. Examination of these
passages shows great divergences from the original; even where he
purports to quote textually, using the expressions " Plato says," or
" Plotinus says," he by no means quotes word for word . In fact, he
seems to have had a positive distaste for quoting textually from other
works. He cannot conquer this even when quoting from Euclid; he
says in his note on I. 22, " we will follow the words of the geometer "
but fails, nevertheless, to reproduce the text of Euclid unchanged".
W e now come to the sources themselves from which Proclus drew
1

2

7

10

11

I

Van Pesch illustrates this by an objection refuted in the note on I. 9, p. 273, 11 sqq.
After using the above expression to introduce the objection, Proclus uses further on (p. 173,25)
the term "they say" (tpao-lv).
8

4

6

8

1 0

I I

Proclus, p. 22, 1 5 .
ibid. p. 71, 18.
ibid. p. 125, 8.
ibid. p. 241, 19.
ibid. p. 362, 1 5 .

8

8

7

ibid. p. 56, 25.
ibid. p. 105, 5.
ibid. p. 200, 2.
ibid. p. 352, 15.

See the passages referred to by van Pesch (p. 70). The most glaring case is a passage
(p. 31, 19) where he quotes Plotinus, using the expression " Plotinus says
" Comparison
with Plotinus, Ennead.
I. 3, 3, shows that very few words are those of Plotinus himself; the
rest represent Plotinus' views in Proclus' own language.
Proclus, p. 330, 19 sqq
1 2

