in writing his commentary. Three have already been disposed of,
viz. Heron, Porphyry and Pappus, who had all written commentaries
on the Elements^.
W e go on to
E u d e m u s , the pupil of Aristotle, who, among other works, wrote a
history of arithmetic, a history of astronomy, and a history of geometry.
The importance of the last mentioned work is attested by the frequent
use made of it by ancient writers. That there was no other history
of geometry written after the time of Eudemus seems to be proved by
the remark of Proclus in the course of his famous summary: " Those
who compiled histories bring the development of this science up to
this point. Not much younger than these is Euclid*...."
T h e loss of
Eudemus' history is one of the gravest which fate has inflicted upon
us, for it cannot be doubted that Eudemus had before him a number
of the actual works of earlier geometers, which, as before observed,
seem to have vanished completely when they were superseded by the
treatises of Euclid, Archimedes and Apollonius. A s it is, we have to
be thankful for the fragments from Eudemus which such writers as
Proclus have preserved to us.
I agree with van Pesch that there is no sufficient reason for
doubting that the work of Eudemus was accessible to Proclus at first
hand. For the later writers Simplicius and Eutocius refer to it in
terms such as leave no room for doubt that they had it before them.
I have already quoted a passage from Simplicius' account of the lunes
of Hippocrates to the effect that Eudemus must be considered the
best authority since he lived nearer the times*. In the same place
Simplicius says , " I will set out what Eudemus says word for word
(Kara Xigiv Xeyo/ieva), adding only a little explanation in the shape of
reference to Euclid's Elements owing to the memorandum-like style of
Eudemus (Sid rbv vTro/j.vr)/j,ariKbv rpoirov rov Fiv8rj/j.ov) who sets out
his explanations in the abbreviated form usual with ancient writers.
Now in the second book of the history of geometry he writes as
follows ." It is not possible to suppose that Simplicius would have
written in this way about the style of Eudemus if he had merely been
copying certain passages second-hand out of some other author and
had not the original work itself to refer to. In like manner, Eutocius
speaks of the paralogisms handed down in connexion with the
attempts of Hippocrates and Antiphon to square;the circle , "with
which I imagine that those are accurately acquainted who have
examined (iireo-Ke ifiivov<;) the geometrical history of Eudemus and
know the Ceria Aristotelica." How could the contemporaries of Euto­
cius have examined the work of Eudemus unless it was still extant in
his time?
The passages in which Proclus quotes Eudemus by name as his
authority are as follows :
(i) On I. 26 he says that Eudemus in his history of geometry
8

5

5

8

r

1
5
4
8

See pp. 10 to 27 above.
Proclus, p. 68, 4—7.
See above, p. 29.
Archimedes, ed. Heiberg, vol. III. p. 228.

8

De

5

Simplicius, he. cit., ed. Diels, p. 60, 27.

Prodi

fontibus,

pp.

7,5—75.

