so far as the story of the sacrifice is concerned, the same thing is told
of Thales in connexion with his discovery that the angle in a semi­
circle is a right angle , and Plutarch is not certain whether the o x
was sacrificed on the discovery of I. 47 or of the problem about
application of areas*. Plutarch's doubt suggests that he knew of no
evidence for the story beyond the vague allusion in the distich of
Apollodorus " Logisticus" (the " calculator") cited b y Diogenes
Laertius also"; and Proclus may have had in mind this couplet with
the passages of Plutarch.
We come now to the question of the famous historical summary
given by Proclus*. No one appears to maintain that Eudemus is the
author of even the early part of this summary in the form in which
Proclus gives it. It is, as is well known, divided into two distinct
parts, between which comes the remark, " Those who compiled
histories" bring the development of this science up to this point.
Not much younger than these is Euclid, who put together the
Elements, collecting many of the theorems of Eudoxus, perfecting
many others by Theaetetus, and bringing to irrefragable demonstration
the things which had only been somewhat loosely proved by his pre­
decessors." Since Euclid was later than Eudemus, it is impossible that
Eudemus can have written this. Y e t the style of the summary after
this point does not show any such change from that of the former
portion as to suggest different authorship. T h e author of the earlier
portion recurs frequently to the question of the origin of the
elements of geometry in a way in which no one would be likely to
do who was not later than Euclid ; and it must be the same hand
which in the second portion connects Euclid's Elements with the
work of Eudoxus and Theaetetus*.
If then the summary is the work of one author, and that author
not Eudemus, who is it likely to have been ? Tannery answers that
it is Geminus ; but I think, with van Pesch, that he has failed to
show why it should be Geminus rather than another. A n d certainly
the extracts which we have from Geminus' work suggest that the sort
of topics which it dealt with was quite different; they seem rather to
have been general questions of the content of mathematics, and even
Tannery admits that historical details could only have come inci­
dentally into the work*.
Could the author have been Proclus himself? Circumstances
1

7

1

Diogenes Laertius, I. 74, p. 6, ed. Cobet.

* Plutarch, non posse

suaviter

vivi

secundum

Epicurum,

1 1 ; Symp.

VIII, 2.

* Diog. Laert. VIII. 11, p. 507, ed. Cobet:
*HcUa Hvday6pTjs TO TcpticXeif

eOpero

ypdp.pxt

t

See on this subject Tannery, La Giomltrie
grccquc, p. 105.
* Proclus, pp. 64—70.
' The plural is well explained by Tannery, La Giomitric
grecque, pp. 73, 74. No doubt
the author of the summary tried to supplement Eudemus by means of any other histories
which threw light on the subject. Thus e.g. the allusion (p. 64, 11) to the Nile recalls
Herodotus. Cf. the expression in Proclus, p. 64, 19, irooa run iroXkwv ItrrbprjTai.
* Tannery, La Glomtirie
ibid. pp. 66—75.
7

grecqut,

p. 75.
8 ibid.

p. 19.

