which seem to suggest this possibility are ( i ) that, as already stated,
the question of the origin of the Elements is kept prominent,
(2) that there is no mention of Democritus, whom Eudemus would
not be likely to have ignored, while a follower of Plato would be
likely enough to do him the injustice, following the example of Plato
who was an opponent of Democritus, never once mentions him, and
is said to have wished to burn all his writings , and (3) the allusion at
the beginning to the " inspired Aristotle " (o Sat^owo? 'Apto-TOTe\»)?) ,
though this may easily have been inserted by Proclus in a quotation
made b y him from someone else. On the other hand there are
considerations which suggest that Proclus himself was not the writer.
(1) T h e style of the whole passage is not such as to point to him
as the author. (2) If he wrote it, it is hardly conceivable that he
would have passed over in silence the discovery of the analytical
method, the invention of Plato to which he attached so much
importance".
There is nothing improbable in the conjecture that Proclus quoted
the summary from a compendium of Eudemus' history made by some
later writer: but as yet the question has not been definitely settled.
All that is certain is that the early part of the summary must have
been made up from scattered notices found in the great work of
Eudemus.
Proclus refers to another work of Eudemus besides the history,
viz. a book on The Angle (ftifiXiov wepl yoovias)'. Tannery assumes
that this must have been part of the history, and uses this assumption
to confirm his idea that the history was arranged according to subjects,
not according to chronological order". T h e phraseology of Proclus
however unmistakably suggests a separate work; and that the
history was chronologically arranged seems to be clearly indicated by
the remark of Simplicius that Eudemus "also counted Hippocrates
among the more ancient writers" (hi T O I T iraXaioTepoisy.
The passage of Simplicius about the lunes of Hippocrates throws
considerable light on the style of Eudemus' history. Eudemus wrote
in a memorandum-like or summary manner (TOV viropvripMTiicbv rpowov
TOV E u S ^ o u ) when reproducing what he found in the ancient writers;
sometimes it is clear that he left out altogether proofs or constructions
of things by no means easy .
Geminus.
The discussions about the date and birthplace of Geminus form a
whole literature, as to which I must refer the reader to Manitius and
Tittel . Though the name looks like a Latin name (Geminus), Mani1

2

7

8

9

1
3

4

2

Diog. Laertius, ix. 40, p. 237, ed. Cobet.
Proclus, p. 64, 8.
Proclus, p. 2 1 1 , 19 sqq.; the passage is quoted above, p. 36.
ibid.

p. 1 2 5 , 8.

6

5

Tannery, La GionUtriegrttque,

p. 16.

7

Simplicius, ed. Diels, p. 69, 23.
ibid, p: 60, 29.
Cf. Simplicius, p. 63, 19 sqq.; p. 64, 25 sqq.; also Usener's note " de supplendis
Hippocratis quas omisit Eudemus constructionibus added to Diels' preface, pp. xxiii—xxvi.
Manitius, Gemini
elementa
astronomiae
(Teubner, 1898), pp. 237—252 ; Tittel, art.
8

9

" Geminos" in

vol. VII.. 1910.

Pauly-Wissowa's Real-Encyclopadie

der classischen

AUertumswissenschaft,

