tius concluded that, since it appears as rep,ivo<; in all Greek MSS. and
as re/^etvo? in some inscriptions, it is Greek and possibly formed from
yep, as 'Epyivos is from epy and ' A \ e f Ivoi from aXef (cf. also
'1KTIVO<;,
Kparlvo<s). Tittel is equally positive that it is Geminus and suggests
that re/j.ivos is due to a false analogy with 'AXegivos etc. and Te/^eti/o?
wrongly formed on the model of 'AtTtwtivm,'
Aypnrirelva.
Geminus,
a Stoic philosopher, born probably in the island of Rhodes, was the
author of a comprehensive work on the classification of mathematics,
and also wrote, about 73-67 B.C., a not less comprehensive commentary
on the meteorological textbook of his teacher Posidonius of Rhodes.
It is the former work in which we are specially interested here.
Though Proclus made great use of it, he does not mention its title,
unless we may suppose that, in the passage (p. 177, 24) where, after
quoting from Geminus a classification of lines which never meet, he
says, " these remarks I have selected from the <piXoicaXia of Geminus,"
(piXoKaXla is a title or an alternative title. Pappus however quotes a
work of Geminus "on the classification of the mathematics" (ev too
irepl TSJ<I T&V fta0T)p.dTa>v T a f e o j s ) , while Eutocius quotes from " the
sixth book of the doctrine of the mathematics " (ev rm exr(p rrj<: rSsv
padr/paToav
0ea>pia<;Y. Tannery pointed out that the former title
corresponds well, enough to the long extract which Proclus gives in
his first prologue, and also to the fragments contained in the A nonymi
variae collectiones published by Hultsch at the end of his edition of
Heron ; but it does not suit most of the o'ther passages borrowed by
Proclus. The correct title was therefore probably that given by
Eutocius, Tlte Doctrine, or Theory, of the Mathematics;
and Pappus
probably refers to one particular portion of the work, say the first
Book. If the sixth Book treated of conies, as we may conclude from
Eutocius, there must have been more Books to follow, because Proclus
has preserved us details about higher curves, which must have come
later. If again Geminus finished his work and wrote with the same
fulness about the other branches of mathematics as he did about
geometry, there must have been a considerable number of Books
altogether. A t all events it seems to have been designed to give
a complete view of the whole science of mathematics, and in fact to
be a sort of encyclopaedia of the subject.
I shall now indicate first the certain, and secondly the probable,
obligations of Proclus to Geminus, in which task I have only to follow
van Pesch, who has embodied the results of TittePs similar inquiry also .
I shall only omit the passages as regards which a case for attributing
them to Geminus does not seem to me to have been made out.
First come the following passages which must be attributed to
Geminus, because Proclus mentions his name:
(1) (In the first prologue of Proclus ) on the division of mathe1

8

4

8

8

7

1
8
8
8

Gemini
7

8

Pappus, ed. Hultsch, p. 1026, 9.
Apollonius, ed. Heiberg, vol. II. p. 170.
Tannery, La Giomitrie
grecque, pp. 18, 19.
Proclus, pp. 38, 1—41, 8.
Heron, ed. Hultsch, pp. 146, 16—249, 12.
Van Pesch, De Prodi fonlibus,
pp. 9 7 — 1 1 3 . The dissertation of Tittel is entitled De
4

Stoici

studiis

mathematicis

(1895).

Proclus, pp. 38, 1—42,8, except the allusion in p. 4 1 , 8 — 1 0 , to Ctesibius and Heron and

