Apollonius wrote a tract on the parallel-postulate be correct, it may
have been included in the same work. W e may conclude generally
that, in it, Apollonius tried to remodel the beginnings of geometry,
reducing the number of axioms, appealing, in his definitions of lines,
surfaces etc., more to experience than to abstract reason, and
substituting for certain proofs others of a more general character.
The probabilities are that, in quoting from the tract of P t o l e m y in
which he tried to prove the parallel-postulate, Proclus had the actual
work before him. For, after an allusion to it as " a certain b o o k "
he gives two long extracts , and at the beginning of the second
indicates the title of the tract, " in the (book) about the meeting of
straight lines produced from (angles) less than two right angles," as
he has very rarely done in other cases.
Certain things from Posidonius are evidently quoted at second­
hand, the authority being Geminus (e.g. the definitions of figure and
parallels); but besides these we have quotations from a separate work
which he wrote to controvert Zeno of Sidon, an Epicurean who had
sought to destroy the whole of geometry . W e are told that Zeao
had argued that, even if we admit the fundamental principles (ap\<sl)
of geometry, the deductions from them cannot be proved without the
admission of something else as well, which has not been included in
the said principles'. On i. I Proclus gives at some length the argu­
ments of Zeno and the reply of Posidonius as regards this proposition .
In this case Zeno's " something e l s e " which he considers to be
assumed is the fact that two straight lines cannot have a common
segment, and then, as regards the "proof" of it by means of the
bisection of a circle by its diameter, he objects that it has been
assumed that two circumferences (arcs) of circles cannot have a
common part. Lastly, he makes up, for the purpose of attacking it,
another supposed "proof" of the fact that two straight lines cannot
have a common part. Proclus appears, more than once, to be quoting
the actual words of Zeno and Posidonius; in particular, two expres­
sions used by Posidonius about " the acrid Epicurean" (TOV Spipiiv
1

2

3

5

'ETriKovpeiov)' and his "misrepresentations" (Hoo-eiSd>vi,6<; (prjtrf TOV

Tirjviova o-vKotpavTetv) . It is not necessary to suppose that Proclus
had the original work of Zeno before him, because Zeno's arguments
may easily have been got from Posidonius' reply; but he would
appear to have quoted direct from the latter at all events.
The work of Carpus mechanicus (a treatise on astronomy) quoted
from by Proclus must have been accessible to him at first-hand,
because a portion of the extract from it about the relation of theorems
and problems is reproduced word for word. Moreover, if he were not
using the book itself, Proclus would hardly be in a position to question
whether the introduction of the subject of theorems and problems
7

8

9

1

Proclus, p. 101, 23.

3

ibid.

5

ibid. pp. 214, 18—215, 1 3 ; pp. 216, 10—218, 1 1 .

p. 200, 1 — 3.

6

ibid.

8

ibid. pp. 241, 19—243, 1 1 .

p. 216, 2 1 .

2

ibid.

pp. 362, 14—363, 18; pp. 365, 7—367, 27.
4

ibid.

pp. 199, 11—200, 1.

7

ibid.

p. 218, I .

9

ibid.

pp. 242, 22—243, 1 1 .

