was opportune in the place where it was found (et ftht Kara icaipbv rj
p-V, "irapeLcrOw irpds TO irapov) .
It is of course evident that Proclus had before him the original
works of Plato, Aristotle, Archimedes and Plotinus, as well as the
~S.vfip.iKTa of Porphyry and the works of his master Syrianus (6 yperepo?
KaOriyepMavy, from whom he quotes in his note on the definition of an
angle. Tannery also points out that he must have had before him a
group of works representing the Pythagorean tradition on its mystic,
as distinct from its mathematical, side, from Philolaus downwards, and
comprising the more or less apocryphal iepbs X070? of Pythagoras, the
Oracles (\6yia), and Orphic verses*.
Besides quotations from writers whom we can identify with more
or less certainty, there are many other passages which are doubtless
quoted from other commentators whose names we do not know. A
list of such passages is given by van Pesch , and there is no need to
cite them here.
Van Pesch also gives at the end of his work* a convenient list of
the books which, as the result of his investigation, he deems to have
been accessible to and directly used by Proclus. The list is worth
giving here, on the same ground of convenience. It is as follows:
Eudemus : history of geometry.
Geminus : the theory of the mathematical sciences.
Heron : commentary on the Elements of Euclid.
Porphyry:
„
„
Pappus:
Apollonius of Perga : a work relating to elementary geometry.
Ptolemy: on the parallel-postulate.
Posidonius : a book controverting Zeno of Sidon.
Carpus: astronomy.
Syrianus: a discussion on the angle.
Pythagorean philosophical tradition.
Plato's works.
Aristotle's works.
Archimedes' works.
Plotinus: Enneades.
Lastly we come to the question what passages, if any, in the
commentary of Proclus represent his own contributions to the subject.
A s we have seen, the onus probandi must be held to rest upon him
who shall maintain that a particular note is original on the part of
Proclus. Hence it is not enough that it should be impossible to point
to another writer as the probable source of a note; we must have a
positive reason for attributing it to Proclus. The criterion must there­
fore be found either ( i ) in the general terms in which Proclus points
out the deficiencies in previous commentaries and indicates the
respects in which his own will differ from them, or (2) in specific
expressions used by him in introducing particular notes which may
1

4

1
3

4

3

Proclus, p. 241, ft, 22.
Tannery, La Giomttricgrecque,

pp. 25, 26,

Van

p. 139.

Pesch, De Prodi

fontibus,

ibid. p. 123, 19.
• ibid.

p.

155.

