CHAPTER
PRINCIPAL

TRANSLATIONS

A N D

VIII.

EDITIONS

OF T H E

ELEMENTS.

1

C I C E R O is the first Latin author to mention E u c l i d ; but it is not
likely that in Cicero's time Euclid had been translated into Latin or
was studied to any considerable extent by the Romans; for, as Cicero
says in another place', while geometry was held in high honour
among the Greeks, so that nothing was more brilliant than their
mathematicians, the Romans limited its scope by having regard only
to its utility for measurements and calculations. How very little
theoretical geometry satisfied the Roman agritnensores
is evidenced
by the work of Balbus de mensuris*, where some of the definitions of
Eucl. Book I. are given. Again, the extracts from the Elements
found
in the fragment attributed to Censorinus (fl. 238 A . D ) are confined to
the definitions, postulates, and common notions. But by degrees the
Elements passed even among the Romans into the curriculum of a
liberal education ; for Martianus Capella speaks of the effect of the
enunciation of the proposition " how to construct an equilateral
triangle on a given straight line " among a company of philosophers,
who, recognising the first proposition of the Elements, straightway
break out into encomiums on Euclid . But the Elements were then
(c. 470 A . D . ) doubtless read in Greek ; for what Martianus Capella
gives* was drawn from a Greek source, as is shown by the occurrence
of Greek words and by the wrong translation of I. def. I (" punctum
vero est cuius pars nihil est"). Martianus may, it is true, have
quoted, not from Euclid himself, but from Heron or some other ancient
source.
But it is clear from a certain palimpsest at Verona that some
scholar had already attempted to translate the Elements into Latin.
This palimpsest has part of the " Moral reflections on the Book of
Job " by Pope Gregory the Great written in a hand of the 9th c. above
certain fragments which in the opinion of the best judges date from
the 4th c. Among these are fragments of Vergil and of Livy, as well
as a geometrical fragment which purports to be taken from the I4tn
and 15th Books of Euclid. A s a matter of fact it is from Books XII.
and x m . and is of the nature of a free rendering, or rather a new
4

5

7

1

De oratore III. 13J.
' Tusc. I. 5.
* Gromatici Vetera, 1. 97 sq. (ed. F . Blume, K . L a c h m a n n and A . Rudorff.

1848, 1851).
4

Censorinus, ed. Hultsch, pp. 60—3.
• Martianus Capella, V I . 7 1 4 .
Cf. Cantor, i „ p. 565.
7

• ibid. V I . 708 sq.

Berlin,

