1

arrangement, of Euclid with the propositions in different order . T h e
M S . was evidently the translator's own copy, because some words are
struck out and replaced by synonyms. We do not know whether the
translator completed the translation of the whole, or in what relation
his version stood to our other sources.
Magnus Aurelius Cassiodorus (b. about 475 A . D . ) in the geometrical
part of his encyclopaedia De artibus ac disciplinis liberalium
literarum
says that geometry was represented among the Greeks by Euclid,
Apollonius, Archimedes, and others, " of whom Euclid was given us
translated into the Latin language by the same great man Boethius " ;
also in his collection of letters* is a letter from Theodoric to Boethius
containing the words, "for in your translations... Nicomachus the
arithmetician, and Euclid the geometer, are heard in the Ausonian
tongue." T h e so-called Geometry of Boethius which has come down
to us by no means constitutes a translation of Euclid. The M S S .
variously give five, four, three or two Books, but they represent only
two distinct compilations, one normally in five Books and the other
in two. Even the latter, which was edited by Friedlein, is not
genuine , but appears to have been put together in the n t h c, from
various sources. It begins with the definitions of Eucl. I., and in these
are traces of perfectly correct readings which are not found even in
the M S S . of the 10th c , but which can be traced in Proclus and other
ancient sources; then come the Postulates (five only), the Axioms
(three only), and after these some definitions of Eucl. I I . , I I I . , I V .
N e x t come the enunciations of Eucl. I., of ten propositions of Book II.,
and of some from Books I I I . , I V . , but always without proofs ; there
follows an extraordinary passage which indicates that the author will
now give something of his own in elucidation of Euclid, though what
follows is a literal translation of the proofs of Eucl. I . I — 3 . This
latter passage, although it affords a strong argument against the
genuineness of this part of the work, shows that the Pseudoboethius
had a Latin translation of Euclid from which he extracted the three
propositions.
Curtze has reproduced, in the preface to his edition of the trans­
lation by Gherard of Cremona of an-NairlzI's Arabic commentary on
Euclid, some interesting fragments of a translation of Euclid taken
from a Munich M S . of the 10th c. T h e y are on two leaves used
for the cover of the M S . (Bibliothecae Regiae Universitatis Monacensis
2° 757) and consist of portions of Eucl. I . 37, 38 and II. 8, translated
literally word for word from the Greek text. T h e translator seems to
have been an Italian (cf. the words "capitolonono" used for the ninth
prop, of Book I I . ) who knew very little Greek and had moreover little
mathematical knowledge. For example, he translates the capital letters
denoting points in figures as if they were numerals: thus rd ABr,
3

1

T h e fragment was deciphered by W . Studemund, who communicated his results to
Cantor.
Cassiodorus, Variae, I. 45, p . 40, 12 ed. M o m m s e n .
See especially Weissenborn in Abhandlungen
zur Gesch. d. Math. II. p . 185 sq.;
Heiberg in Philologus, XLIII. p. 507 sq. ; Cantor, Is, p . 580 sq.
3

3

