A E Z is translated "que primo secundo et tertio quarto quinto et
septimo," T becomes "tricentissimo " and so on. T h e Greek M S . which
he used was evidently written in uncials, for A E Z ® becomes in one
place " quod autem septimo nono," showing that he mistook A E for
the particle Be, and xal 6 2 T U is rendered "sicut tricentissimo et
quadringentissimo," showing that the letters must have been written
KAIOCTU.
The date of the Englishman Athelhard (^Ethelhard) is approxi­
mately fixed by some remarks in his work Perdifficiles
Quaestiones
Naturales which, on the ground of the personal allusions they contain,
must be assigned to the first thirty years of the 12th c.
H e wrote a
number of philosophical works. Little is known about his life.
He
is said to have studied at Tours and Laon, and to have lectured at the
latter school. He travelled to Spain, Greece, Asia Minor and E g y p t ,
and acquired a knowledge of Arabic, which enabled him to translate
from the Arabic into Latin, among other works, the Elements
of
Euclid. T h e date of this translation must be put at about 1120.
M S S . purporting to contain Athelhard's version are extant in the
British Museum (Harleian No. 5404 and others), Oxford (Trin. Coll.
47 and Ball. Coll. 257 of 12th a ) , Niirnberg (Johannes Regiomontanus'
copy) and Erfurt
A m o n g the very numerous works of Gherard of Cremona ( 1 1 1 4 —
1187) are mentioned translations of " 15 Books of Euclid " and of the
Data*.
Till recently this translation of the Elements was supposed to
be lost; but A x e l Anthon Bjornbo has succeeded (1904) in discovering
a translation from the Arabic which is different from the two others
known to us (those by Athelhard and Campanus respectively), and
which he, on grounds apparently convincing, holds to be Gherard's.
Already in 1901 Bjornbo had found Books X . — x v . of this translation
in a M S . at Rome (Codex Reginensis lat. 1268 of 14th c.)'; but three
years later he had traced three M S S . containing the whole of the same
translation at Paris (Cod. Paris. 7216, 15th a), Boulogne-sur-Mer
(Cod. Bononiens. 196, 14th a), and Bruges (Cod. Brugens. 521, 14th a),
and another at Oxford (Cod. Digby 174, end of 12th c.) containing a
fragment, X I . 2 to X I V .
T h e occurrence of Greek words in this
translation such as rombus, romboides (where Athelhard keeps the
Arabic terms), ambligonius,
orthogonius, gnomo, pyramis
etc., show
that the translation is independent of Athelhard's. Gherard appears
to have had before him an old translation of Euclid from the Greek
which Ath'elhard also often followed, especially in his terminology,
using it however in a very different manner. Again, there are some
Arabic terms, e.g. meguar for axis of rotation, which Athelhard did not
use, but which is found in almost all the translations that are with
certainty attributed to Gherard of Cremona; there occurs also the
1

1

Cantor, Gesch. d. Math. i „ p . 006.
* Boncompagni, Delia vita e delle opere di Gherardo Cremonese, R o m e , 1 8 5 1 , p. 5.
' Described in an appendix to Studien iiber Menelaos'' Spharik
(Abhattdlungcn
Geschichte der mathematischen Wisscnschaften,
XIV., 1902).
See Bibliotheca Mathematica, V I , , 1 9 0 5 - 6 , p p . 1 4 1 — 8 .
4

zur

