expression "superficies equidistantium laterum et rectorum angulorum,"
found also in Gherard's translation of an-Nairizi, where Athelhard says
" parallelogrammum rectangulum." T h e translation is much clearer
than Athelhard's: it is neither abbreviated nor "edited" as Athelhard's
appears to have been ; it is a word-for-word translation of an Arabic
M S . containing a revised and critical edition of Thabit's version. It
contains several notes quoted from Thabit himself ( Thebit dixit), e.g.
about alternative proofs etc. which Thabit found " in another Greek
M S . , " and is therefore a further testimony to Thabit's critical treatment
of the text after Greek M S S . T h e new editor also added critical
remarks of his own, e.g. on other proofs which he found in other
Arabic versions, but not in the Greek: whence it is clear that he
compared the Thabit version before him with other versions as care­
fully as Thabit collated the Greek M S S . Lastly, the new editor speaks
of " Thebit qui transtulit hunc librum in arabicam linguam " and of
"translatio Thebit," which may tend to confirm the statement of al-Qifti
who credited Thabit with an independent translation, and not (as the
Fihrist
does) with a mere improvement of the version of Ishaq b.
Hunain.
Gherard's translation of the Arabic commentary of an-Nairizi on
the first ten Books of the Elements
was discovered by Maximilian
Curtze in a M S . at Cracow and published as a supplementary volume
to Heiberg and Menge's E u c l i d : it will often be referred to in this
work.
N e x t in chronological order comes Johannes Campanus (Campano)
of Novara.
H e is mentioned by Roger Bacon (1214-1294) as a
prominent mathematician of his time , and this indication of his date
is confirmed by the fact that he was chaplain to Pope Urban I V , who
was Pope from 1261 to 1281 . His most important achievement was
his -edition of the Elements including the two Books Xiv. and x v .
which are not Euclid's. T h e sources of Athelhard's and Campanus'
translations, and the relation between them, have been the subject of
much discussion, which does not seem to have led as yet to any
definite conclusion. Cantor ( I I , , p. 91) gives references and some
particulars. It appears that there is a M S . at Munich (Cod. lat. Mon.
13021) written by Sigboto in the 12th c. at Priifning near Regensburg,
and denoted by Curtze by the letter R, which contains the enunciations
of part of Euclid. T h e Munich MSS. of Athelhard and Campanus'
translations have many enunciations textually identical with those in
R, so that the source of all three must, for these enunciations, have
1

8

s

4

1

Anaritii
in decern libros priores Elementorum Euclidis Commentarii ex interpretatione
Gherardi Cremonensis in codice Cracoviensi 569 servala edidit Maximilianus Curtze, L e i p z i g
(Teubner), 1899.
* Cantor, I I , , p. 88.
* Tiraboschi, Storia delta letteratura italiana, i v . 1 4 5 — 1 6 0 .
H . Weissenborn in Zeitsehrift fiir Math. u. Physik, x x v . , Supplement, p p . 143—166,
and in his monograph, Die Ubersetzungen des Euklid durch Campano und Zamberti (1882);
M a x . Curtze in Philologische Rundschau (1881), I. p p . 543—950, and in Jahresbtricht iiber
die Fortschritte der classischen Alterthumswissenschaft,
XL. (1884, III.) p p . 1 9 — » > ; Heiberg
in Zeitsehrift fiir Math. u. Physik, x x x v . , hist.-litt A b t h . , p p . 48—58 and p p . 8 1 — 6 .
4

