pressed, Campanus' clearer and more complete, following the Greek
text more closely, though still at some distance.
Further, the
arrangement in the two is different; in Athelhard the proofs regularly
precede the enunciations, Campanus follows the usual order. It is a
question how far the differences in the proofs, and certain additions in
each, are due to the two translators themselves or go back to Arabic
originals. T h e latter supposition seems to Curtze and Cantor the
more probable one. Curtze's general view of the relation of Campanus
to Athelhard is to the effect that Athelhard's translation was gradually
altered, from the form in which it appears in the two Erfurt M S S .
described by Weissenborn, by successive copyists and commentators
who had Arabic originals before them, until it took the form which
Campanus gave it and in which it was published. In support of this
view Curtze refers to Regiomontanus' copy of the Athelhard-Campanus
translation. In Regiomontanus' own preface the title is given, and
this attributes the translation to Athelhard; but, while this copy
agrees almost exactly with Athelhard in Book I., yet, in places where
Campanus is more lengthy, it has similar additions, and in the later
Books, especially from Book I I I . onwards, agrees absolutely with
Campanus; Regiomontanus, too, himself implies that, though the
translation was Athelhard's, Campanus had revised it; for he has
notes in the margin such as the following, "Campani est hec," "dubito
an demonstret hie Campanus " etc.
W e come now to the printed editions of the whole or of portions
of the Elements.
This is not the place for a complete bibliography,
such as Riccardi has attempted in his valuable memoir issued in five
parts between 1887 and 1893, which makes a large book in itself .
I shall confine myself to saying something of the most noteworthy
translations and editions. It will be convenient to give first the Latin
translations which preceded the publication of the editio princeps of
the Greek text in 1533, next the most important editions of the Greek
text itself, and after them the most important translations arranged
according to date of first appearance and languages, first the Latin
translations after 1533, then the Italian, German, French and English
translations in order.
It may be added here that the first allusion, in the West, to the
Greek text as still extant is found in Boccaccio's commentary on the
Divina
Commedia of Dante . N e x t Johannes Regiomontanus, who
intended to publish the Elements after the version of Campanus, but
with the latter's mistakes corrected, saw in Italy (doubtless when
staying with his friend Bessarion) some Greek M S S . and noticed how
far they differed from the Latin version (see a letter of his written in
the year 1471 to Christian Roder of Hamburg)*.
1

2

1

Saggio di una Bibliografia
Euclidea, memoria del Prof. Pietro Riccardi (Bologna,
1887, 1888, 1890, 1893).
I. p . 404.
Published in C . T . de Murr's Memorabilia Bibliolhecarum
Norimbergcnsium,
Part I.
p . 190 sqq.
2

5

