I.

LATIN

TRANSLATIONS

PRIOR

TO

1533.

1482. In this year appeared the first printed edition of Euclid,
which was also the first printed mathematical book of any import­
ance. This was printed at Venice by Erhard Ratdolt and contained
Campanus' translation . Ratdolt belonged to a family of artists at
Augsburg, where he was born about 1443. Having learnt the trade
of printing at home, he went in 1475 to Venice, and founded there a
famous printing house which he managed for 11 years, after which he
returned to Augsburg and continued to print important books until
1516. He is said to have died in 1528. Kastner gives a short
description of this first edition of Euclid and quotes the dedication to
Prince Mocenigo of Venice which occupies the page opposite to the
first page of text. The book has a margin of 2,\ inches, and in this
margin are placed the figures of the propositions. Ratdolt says in
his dedication that at that time, although books by ancient and
modern authors were printed every day in Venice, little or nothing
mathematical had appeared : a fact which he puts down to the diffi­
culty involved by the figures, which no one had up to that time
succeeded in printing. He adds that after much labour he had
discovered a method by which figures could be produced as easily as
letters'. Experts are in doubt as to the nature of Ratdolt's discovery.
Was it a method of making figures up out of separate parts of figures,
straight or curved lines, put together as letters are put together to
make words ? In a life of Joh. Gottlob Immanuel Breitkopf, a con­
temporary of Kastner's own, this member of the great house of
Breitkopf is credited with this particular discovery. Experts in that
same house expressed the opinion that Ratdolt's figures were wood­
cuts, while the letters denoting points in the figures were like the
other letters in the t e x t ; yet it was with carved wooden blocks that
printing began. If Ratdolt was the first to print geometrical figures,
it was not long before an emulator arose; for in the very same year
Mattheus Cordonis of Windischgratz employed woodcut mathematical
figures in printing Oresme's De latitudintbus*.
How eagerly the
opportunity of spreading geometrical knowledge was seized upon is
proved by the number of editions which followed in the next few
years. Even the year 1482 saw two forms of the book, though they
only differ in the first sheet. Another edition came out in i486
(Ulmae,
apud Io. Regerum)
and another in 1491 (Vincentiae
per
1

2

1

Curtze (An-Nairizi, p. xiii) reproduces the heading of the first page of the text as
follows (there is no title-page): Preclariffimu opus elemento^f Euclidis megarefis vna cu
cdmentis Campani pfpicaciffimi in arte geometria incipit felicit', after which the definitions
begin at once.
Other copies have the shorter heading ; Preclarissimus liber elementorum
Euclidis perspicacissimi: in artem Geometrie incipit quam foelicissime.
A t the end stands
the following: CI O p u s elementoru euclidis megarenf is in geometria arte Jn id quoq) Campani
pfpicaciffimi Comentationes finiui. Erhardus ratdolt Augustensis impreffor folertiffimus .
venetijs impreffit . A n n o falutis . M.cccc.lxxxij . Octauis . Calefi . Jufl . L e c t o r . V a l e .
' Kastner, Geschichte der Mathematik, I. p . 289 sqq. See also Weissenborn, Die UbersetZ'
ungen des Euklid durch Campano und Zamberti, pp. 1 — 7 .
• " M e a industria non sine maximo labore effeci vt qua facilitate litterarum elementa
imprimuntur ea etiam geometrice figure conficerentur."
' Curtze in Zeitsehrift fiir Math. u. Physik, x x . , hist.-litt. A b t h . p. 58.

