INTRODUCTION

[CH.

vm

Leonardum de Basilea et Gulielmum
de Papid), but without the dedi­
cation to Mocenigo who had died in the meantime (1485). If Cam­
panus added anything of his own, his additions are at all events not
distinguished b y any difference of type or otherwise; the enunciations
are in large type, and the rest is printed continuously in smaller type.
There are no superscriptions to particular passages such as Euclides
ex Campano, Campanus, Campani additio, or Campani annotatio, which
are found for the first time in the Paris edition of 1516 giving
both Campanus' version and that of Zamberti (presently to be men­
tioned).
1501. G. Valla included in his encyclopaedic work De expetendis
et fugiendis
rebus published in this year at Venice (in aedibus
Aldi
Romani) a number of propositions with proofs and scholia translated
from a Greek M S . which was once in his possession (cod. Mutin. I l l
B, 4 of the 15 th c ) .
1505. In this year Bartolomeo Zamberti (Zambertus) brought out
at Venice the first translation, from the Greek text, of the whole of the
Elements.
From the title , as well as from his prefaces to the Catoptrica
and Data, with their allusions to previous translators " who take some
things out of authors, omit some, and change some," or " to that most
barbarous translator" who filled a volume purporting to be Euclid's
"with extraordinary scarecrows, nightmares and phantasies," one object
of Zamberti's translation is clear. His animus against Campanus
appears also in a number of notes, e.g. when he condemns the terms
" helmuain" and " helmuariphe " used by Campanus as barbarous,
un-Latin etc., and when he is roused to wrath by Campanus' unfortu­
nate mistranslation of V . Def. 5. He does not seem to have had the
penetration to see that Campanus was translating from an Arabic,
and not from a Greek, text. Zamberti tells us that he spent
seven years over his translation of the thirteen Books of the
Elements.
A s he seems to have been born in 1473, and the Elements
were printed as early as 1500, though the complete work (including the
Phaenomena,
Optica, Catoptrica, Data etc.) has the date 1505 at the
end, he must have translated Euclid before the age of 30. Heiberg
has not been able to identify the M S . of the Elements which Zamberti
used ; but it is clear that it belonged to the worse class of MSS., since
it contains most of the interpolations of the Theonine variety. Zam­
berti, as his title shows, attributed the proofs to Theon.
1509. A s a counterblast to Zamberti, Luca Paciuolo brought out
an edition of Euclid, apparently at the expense of Ratdolt, at Venice
(per Paganinum
de Pagatiinis),
in which he set himself to vindicate
Campanus. T h e title-page of this now very rare edition' begins thus:
"The works of Euclid of Megara, a most acute philosopher and without
1

1

T h e title begins t h u s : " E u c l i d i s megaresis philosophi platonicj mathematicarum
disciplinarum Janitoris: H a b e n t in hoc volumine quicunque ad mathematicam substantiam
aspirant: elementorum libros xiij cum expositione Theonis insignis mathematici. quibus
multa quae deerant ex lectione graeca sumpta addita sunt nec non plurima peruersa et
raepostere: voluta in Campani interpretatione: ordinata digesta et castigata sunt etc."
or a description of the book see Weissenborn, p . n sqq.
See Weissenborn, p. 30 sqq.

f

2

