question the chief of all mathematicians, translated b y Campanus their
most faithful
interpreter!'
It proceeds to say that the translation had
been, through the fault of copyists, so spoiled and deformed that it
could scarcely be recognised as Euclid. Luca Paciuolo accordingly
has polished and emended it with the most critical judgment, has
corrected 129 figures wrongly drawn and added others, besides supply­
ing short explanations of difficult passages. It is added that Scipio
Vegius of Milan, distinguished for his knowledge " o f both
languages"
(i.e. of course Latin and Greek), as well as in medicine and the more
sublime studies, had helped to make the edition more perfect. Though
Zamberti is not once mentioned, this latter remark must have refer­
ence to Zamberti's statement that his translation was from the Greek
t e x t ; and no doubt Zamberti is aimed at in the wish of Paciuolo's
" that others too would seek to acquire knowledge instead of merely
showing off, or that they would not try to make a market of the
things of which they are ignorant, as it were (selling) smoke ."
Weissenborn observes that, while there are many trivialities in Paci­
uolo's notes, they contain some useful and practical hints and explana­
tions of terms, besides some new proofs which of course are not
difficult if one takes the liberty, as Paciuolo does, of diverging from
Euclid's order and assuming for the proof of a proposition results not
arrived at till later. T w o not inapt terms are used in this edition to
describe the figures of I I I . 7, 8, the former of which is called the
goose's foot (pes anseris), the second the peacock's tail (cauda
pavonis)
Paciuolo as the castigator of Campanus' translation, as he calls himself,
failed to correct the mistranslation of v. Def. s . Before the fifth
Book he inserted a discourse which he gave at Venice on the
15th August, 1508, in S. Bartholomew's Church, before a select
audience of 500, as an introduction to his elucidation of that Book.
1516. T h e first of the editions giving Campanus' and Zamberti's
translations in conjunction was brought out at Paris (in officina
Henrici
Stephani e regione scholae Decretorum).
T h e idea that only the enun­
ciations were Euclid's, and that Campanus was the author of the proofs
in his translation, while Theon was the author of the proofs in the Greek
text, reappears in the title of this edition; and the enunciations of the
added Books xiv., x v . are also attributed to Euclid, Hypsicles being
credited with the proofs . T h e date is not on the title-page nor at the
1

a

8

1

" A t q u e utinam et alii cognoscere vellent non ostentare aut ea quae nesciunt veluti
fumum venditare non conarentur."
' Campanus' translation in Ratdolt's edition is as follows: "Quantitates quae dicuntur
continuam habere proportionalilatem, sunt, quarum eque multiplicia aut equa sunt aut
eque sibi sine interruptione addunt aut minuunt" (!), to which Campanus adds the n o t e :
Continue proportionalia sunt quorum omnia multiplicia equalia sunt continue proportionalia.
Sed noluit ipsam diffinitionem proponere sub hac forma, quia tunc diffiniret idem per idem,
aperte (?a parte) tamen rei est istud cum sua dimnitione convertibile."
' ' Euclidis Megarensis' Geometricorum Elementorum I.ibn X v . Campani Galli transalpini in eosdem commentariorum libri XV. Theonis Alexandrini Bartholomaeo Zamberto
Veneto interprete, in tredecim priores, commentationum libri x m . Hypsiclis Alexandrini in
duos posteriores, eqdem Bartholomaeo Zamberto Veneto interprete, commentariorum libri II."
O n the last page (261) is a similar statement of content, but with the difference that the
expression "ex Campani...deinde Theonis...et Hypsiclis...traditionibus"
F o r description
see Weissenborn, p. 56 sqq.
M

8

