end, but the letter of dedication to Francois Briconnet by Jacques
Lefevre is dated the day after the Epiphany, 1516. T h e figures are
in the margin. T h e arrangement of the propositions is as follows:
first the enunciation with the heading Euclides ex Campano, then the
proof with the note Campanus, and after that, as Campani additio, any
passage found in the edition of Campanus' translation but not in the
Greek t e x t ; then follows the text of the enunciation translated from
the Greek with the heading Euclides ex Zamberto, and lastly the proof
headed Theo ex Zamberto.
There are separate figures for the two proofs.
This edition was reissued with few changes in 1537 and 1546 at Basel
(apud Iohannem Hervagium),
but with the addition of the Phaenomena,
Optica, Catoptrica etc. For the edition of 1537 the Paris edition of
1516 was collated with "a Greek copy" (as the preface says) by
Christian Herlin, professor of mathematical studies at Strassburg,
who however seems to have done no more than correct one or two
passages by the help of the Basel editio princeps (1533), and add the
Greek word in cases where Zamberti's translation of it seemed unsuit­
able or inaccurate.
W e now come to
II.

EDITIONS OF THE GREEK

1533 is the date of the editio princeps,
as follows:

ETKAEIAOT ZTOIXEIflN
EK

TON 8EQN02

Et'v TOV avrov TO irp&Tov,

TEXT.

the title-page of which reads
BIBA>- IE>-

2YN0Y2I0N.

i^rjyrjfidTiov

UpoxXov f3ij3\. S.

Adiecta praefatiuncula in qua de disciplinis
Mathematicis nonnihil.
BASILEAE

APVD IOAN.

M.D.XXXIII.

HERVAGIVM

ANNO

MENSE SEPTEMBRI.

The editor was Simon Grynaeus the elder (d. 1541), who, after
working at Vienna and Ofen, Heidelberg and Tubingen, taught last
of all at Basel, where theology was his main subject. His "prae­
fatiuncula" is addressed to an Englishman, Cuthbert Tonstall ( 1 4 7 4 15 59).
> having studied first at Oxford, then at Cambridge, where
he became Doctor of Laws, and afterwards at Padua, where in addi­
tion he learnt mathematics—mostly from the works of Regiomontanus
and Paciuolo—wrote a book on arithmetic as "a farewell to the
sciences," and then, entering politics, became Bishop of London and
member of the Privy Council, and afterwards (1530) Bishop of Durham.
Grynaeus tells us that he used two MSS. of the text of the Elements,
entrusted to friends of his, one at Venice by " Lazarus Bayfius"
(Lazare de Balf, then the ambassador of the King of France at Venice),
the other at Paris by " Ioann. Rvellius " (Jean Ruel, a French doctor
and a Greek scholar), while the commentaries of Proclus were put at
w n 0

1

1

De arte supputandi libri

quatuor.

