IX.

io]

P R O P O S I T I O N 19

411

Given three numbers a, b, c, to find the condition that they may have an
integral fourth proportional.
T h e Greek text of part of this proposition is hopelessly corrupt. Accord­
ing to it Euclid takes four cases.
(1) a, b, c not in continued proportion, and a, c prime to one another.
(2) a, b, c in continued proportion, and a, c not prime to one another.
(3) a, b, c not in continued proportion, and a, c not prime to one another.
(4) a, b, c in continued proportion, and a, c prime to one another.
(4) is the case dealt with in i x . 17, where it is shown that on hypothesis
(4) a fourth proportional cannot be found.
T h e text now takes case (1) and asserts that a fourth proportional cannot
be found in this case either. We have only to think of 4, 6, 9 in order to see
that there is something wrong here. T h e supposed proof is also wrong. If
possible, says the text, let d be a fourth proportional to a, b, c, and let e
be taken such that
b : c - d : e.

Then, ex aequali,
a : c - c : e,
whence a measures c :
[vn. 20, 21]
which is impossible, since a, c are prime to one another.
But this does not prove that a fourth proportional d cannot be found ; it
only proves that, if a" is a fourth proportional, no integer e can be found to
satisfy the equation
b : c = d : e.

Indeed it is obvious from i x . 16 that in the equation
a : c = c :e

e cannot be integral.
T h e cases (2) and (3) are correctly given, the first in full, and the other as
a case to be proved "similarly" to it.
These two cases really give all that is necessary.
Let the product be be taken.
Then, if a measures be, suppose bc = ad;
therefore
a : b = c : d,
and a" is a fourth proportional.
But, if a does not measure be, no fourth proportional can be found.
For, if x were a fourth proportional, ax would be equal to be, and a would
measure be.
T h e sufficient condition in any case for the possibility of finding a fourth
proportional to a, b, c is that a should measure be.
Theon appears to have corrected the proof by leaving out the incorrect
portion which I have included between daggers and the last case (3) dealt
with in the last lines. Also, in accordance with this arrangement, he does not
distinguish four cases at the beginning but only two. " Either A, B, C are
in continued proportion and the extremes of them A, C are prime to one
another; or not." Then, instead of introducing case (2) by the words
" N e x t let A, B, C . t o find a fourth proportional to them," immediately
following the second dagger above, Theon merely says "But, if not," [i.e.
if it is not the case that a, b, c are in G.P. and a, c prime to one another] " l e t
B by multiplying C make D," and so on.

