if the base HC is in excess of the base CL, the triangle AHC
25 is also in excess of the triangle ACL,
and, if less, less.
Thus, there being four magnitudes, two bases BC, CD
and two triangles ABC, A CD,
equimultiples have been taken of the base BC and the
30 triangle ABC, namely the base HC and the triangle AHC,
and of the base CD and the triangle ADC other, chance, equi­
multiples, namely the base LC and the triangle ALC;
and it has been proved that,
if the base HC is in excess of the base CL, the triangle AHC
35 is also in excess of the triangle ALC;
if equal, equal; and, if less, less.
Therefore, as the base BC is to the base CD, so is the
triangle ABC to the triangle ACD.
[v. Def. 5]
Next, since the parallelogram EC is double of the triangle
[I. 41]
4 0 ABC,
and the parallelogram FC is double of the triangle ACD,
while parts have the same ratio as the same multiples of
them,
[v- 15]
therefore, as the triangle ABC is to the triangle ACD, so is
45 the parallelogram EC to the parallelogram FC.
Since, then, it was proved that, as the base BC is to CD,
so is the triangle ABC to the triangle A CD,
and, as the triangle ABC is to the triangle ACD, so is the
parallelogram EC to the parallelogram CF,
50 therefore also, as the base BC is to the base CD, so is the
parallelogram EC to the parallelogram FC.
[v. n ]
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.


4. Under the same height. The Greek text has "under the same height AC," with
a figure in which the side A C common to the two triangles is perpendicular to the base and
is therefore itself the "height." But, even if the two triangles are placed contiguously so as
to have a common side A C, it is quite gratuitous to require it to be perpendicular to the base.
Theon, on this occasion making an improvement, altered to "which are (6Vra) under the
same height, (namely) the perpendicular drawn from A to BD." I have ventured to alter so
far as to omit "AC" and to draw the figure in the usual way.
14. A B C , A G B , A H G . Euclid, indifferent to exact order, writes
46. Since then it was proved that, as the base B C is to C D , so is the triangle
A B C to the triangle A C D . Here again words have to be supplied in translating the
extremely terse Greek
iittx^v, 4*
i * t « l Br rpbs TJ)» TA,
rptyuror Tpbs T6 A r A
literally " since was proved, as the base
to
triangle ABC to the triangle ACD." Cf. note on v. 16, p. 165.

"AHG,AGB, ABC."

iirel olr
rplywvov,

tf*V

oDrm TO AB
BC CD, so the


