vi. i ]

PROPOSITION i

193

The proof assumes—what is however an obvious deduction from 1. 38—
that, of triangles or parallelograms on unequal bases and between the same
parallels, the greater is that which has the greater base.
It is of course not necessary that the two given triangles should have a
common side, as in the figure; the proof is just as easy if they have not.
The proposition being equally true of triangles and parallelograms of equal
heights, Simson states this fact in a corollary thus:
" From this it is plain that triangles and parallelograms that have equal
altitudes are to one another as their bases.
Let the figures be so placed as to have their bases in the same straight
line; and, if we draw perpendiculars from the vertices of the triangles to the
bases, the straight line which joins the vertices is parallel to that in which
their bases are, because the perpendiculars are both equal and parallel to one
another [1. 33]. Then, if the same construction be made as in the proposition,
the demonstration will be the same."
The object of placing the bases in one straight line is to get the triangles
and parallelograms within the same parallels.
Cf. Proclus' remark on 1. 38
(p. 405, 17) that having the same height is the same thing as being in the
same parallels.
Rectangles, or right-angled triangles, which have one of the sides about
the right angle of the same length can be placed so that the equal sides
coincide and the others are in a straight line. If then we call the common
side the base, the rectangles or the right-angled triangles are to one another
as their heights, by vi. 1. Now, instead of each right-angled triangle or
rectangle, we can take any other triangle or parallelogram respectively with an
equal base and between the same parallels. Thus
Triangles and parallelograms having equal bases are to one another as their
heights.
I.egendre and those authors of modern text-books who follow him in
basing their treatment of proportion on the algebraical definition are obliged
to divide their proofs of propositions like this into two parts, the first of
which proves the particular theorem in the case where the magnitudes are
commensurable, and the second extends it to the case where they are
incommensurable.
Legendre (Eliments de Geometric, III. 3) uses for this extension a rigorous
method by reductio ad absurdum similar to that
used by Archimedes in his treatise On the
equilibrium of planes, 1. 7. The following is
Legendre's proof of the extension of vi. 1 to in­
commensurable parallelograms and bases.
The proposition having been proved for
commensurable bases, let there be two rectangles
ABCD, AEFD
as in the figure, on bases AB,
AE which are incommensurable with one another.
T o prove that r e c t ABCD: r e c t AEFD = AB:
AE.
For, if not, let r e c t ABCD: rect. AEFD
= AB : AO,
(1)
where AO is (for instance) greater than AE.
Divide AB into equal parts each of which is less than EO, and mark off
on AO lengths equal to one of the parts; then there will be at least one point
of division between £ and O.
Let it be I, and draw IK parallel to EF.

