vi. a, 3]

PROPOSITIONS

i—3

195

Again, let the sides AB, AC of the triangle ABC be cut
proportionally, so that, as BD is to DA, so is CE to EA ;
and let DE be joined.
I say that DE is parallel to BC.
For, with the same construction,
since, as BD is to DA, so is CE to EA,
but, as BD is to DA, so is the triangle BDE to the triangle

ADE,
and, as CM is to

so is the triangle CDE

ADE,

to the triangle
[vi. I]

therefore also,
as the triangle BDE
is to the triangle ADE,
so is the
triangle CDE to the triangle ADE.
[v. n ]
Therefore each of the triangles BDE, CDE has the same
ratio to ADE.
Therefore the triangle BDE is equal to the triangle CDE;
[v. 9]

and they are on the same base DE.
But equal triangles which are on the same base are also
in the same parallels.
[i. 39]
Therefore DE is parallel to BC.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.

Euclid evidently did not think it worth while to distinguish in the
enunciation, or in the figure, the cases in which the parallel to the base cuts
the other two sides produced (a) beyond the point in which they intersect,
(b) in the other direction. Simson gives the three figures and inserts words
in the enunciation, reading "it shall cut the other sides, or those sides produced,
proportionally" and "if the sides, or the sides produced, be cut proportionally."
Todhunter observes that the second part of the enunciation ought to
make it clear which segments in the proportion correspond to which. Thus
e.g., if AD were double of DB, and CE double of EA, the sides would be
cut proportionally, but DE would not be parallel to BC.
T h e omission
could be supplied by saying "and if the sides of the triangle be cut
proportionally so that the segments adjacent to the third side are corresponding
terms in the proportion."

PROPOSITION 

3.

If an angle of a triangle be bisected and the straight line
cutting the angle cut the base also, the segments of the base
will have the same ratio as the remaining sides of the triangle;
and, if the segments of the base have the same ratio as the


