
and also, as BD is to DC, so is BA to AE:
for AD has
been drawn parallel to EC, one of the sides of the triangle

BCE:
therefore also, as BA

[vi. 2]

is to AC, so is BA

to AE.

[v. n ]

Therefore A C is equal to AE,
so that the angle AEC is also equal to the angle ACE.
But the angle AEC is equal to the exterior angle

[v. 9]
[1. 5]
BAD,
[1.29]

and the angle ACE is equal to the alternate angle CAD; [id.]
therefore the angle BAD is also equal to the angle CAD.
Therefore the angle BA C has been bisected by the straight
line AD.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.

The demonstration assumes that CE will meet BA produced in some
point E. This is proved in the same way as it is proved in VI. 4 that BA, ED
will meet if produced. The angles ABD, BDA in the figure of VI. 3 are
together less than two right angles, and the angle BDA is equal to the angle
BCE, since DA, CE are parallel. Therefore the angles ABC, BCE are
together less than two right angles; and BA, CE must meet, by 1. Post. 5.
The corresponding proposition about the segments into which BC is
divided externally by the bisector of the external angle at A when that
bisector meets BC produced (i.e. when the sides AB, AC are not equal) is
important. Simson gives it as a separate proposition, A, noting the fact that
Pappus assumes the result without proof (Pappus, vn. p. 730, 24).
The best plan is however, as De Morgan says, to combine Props. 3 and A
in one proposition, which may be enunciated thus: If an angle of a triangle
be bisected internally or externally by a straight line which cuts the opposite side
or the opposite side produced, the segments of that side will have the same ratio
as the other sides of the triangle; and, if a side of a triangle be divided internally
or externally so that its segments have the same ratio as the other sides of the
triangle, the straight line drawn from the point of section to the angular point
which is opposite to the first mentioned side will bisect the interior or exterior angle
at that angular point.

Let AC be the smaller of the two sides AB, AC, so that the bisector AD
of the exterior angle at A may meet BC produced beyond C. Draw CE
through C parallel to DA, meeting BA in E.
Then, if EA C is the exterior angle bisected by AD in the case of external
bisection, and if a point E is taken on AB in the figure of vi. 3, the proof of


