198

BOOK V I

[VJ. 3

vi. 3 can be used almost word for word for the other case. We have only to
speak of the angle " F A C " for the angle " BAC," and of the angle " FAD"
for the angle "BAD " wherever they occur, to say "let BA, or BA produced,
meet CF in E," and to substitute " BA or BA produced" for
'"BAE"
lower down.

If AD, AE be the internal and external bisectors of the angle A in a
triangle of which the sides AB, AC are unequal, AC being the smaller, and
if AD, AE meet BC and BC produced in D, E respectively,
the ratios of BD to DC and of BE
BA to AC.
Therefore

to EC are alike equal to the ratio of

BE is to EC as BD to

DC,

that is, BE is to EC as the difference between BE
difference between ED and EC,

and ED

is to the

whence BE, ED, EC are in harmonic progression, or DE is a harmonic mean
between BE and EC, or again B, D, C, E is a harmonic range.
Since the angle DAC

is half of the angle

and the angle CAE half of the angle
while the angles BAC,

BAC,

CAE,

CAE are equal to two right angles,

the angle DAE is a right angle.
Hence the circle described on DE as diameter passes through A.
Now, if the ratio of BA to A C is given, and if BC is given, the points
D, E on BC and BC produced are given, and therefore so is the circle on
D, E as diameter. Hence the locus of a point such that its distances from two
given points are in a given ratio (not being a ratio of equality) is a circle.
This locus was discussed by Apollonius in his Plane Loci, Book n., as we
know from Pappus (vn. p. 666), who says that the book contained the
theorem that, if from two given points straight lines inflected to another
point are in a given ratio, the point in which they meet will lie on either a
straight line or a circumference of a circle. The straight line is of course the
locus when the ratio is one of equality. The other case is quoted in the
following form by Eutocius (Apollonius, ed. Heiberg, n. pp. 180—4).
Given two points in a plane and a proportion between unequal straight lines,
it is possible to describe a circle in the plane so that the straight lines inflected
from the given points to the circumference of the circle shall have a ratio the
same as the given one.
Apollonius' construction, as given by Eutocius, is remarkable because he
makes no use of either of the points D, E.
He finds O, the centre of the
required circle, and the length of" its radius directly from the data 2?C and the
given ratio which we will call h: k. But the construction was not discovered
by Apollonius; it belongs to a much earlier date, since it appears in exactly

