ao8

BOOK

VI

[vi. 7

Therefore the triangle ABC is equiangular with the triangle

DEF.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.

Todhunter points out, after Walker, that some more words are necessary
to make the enunciation precise: " I f two triangles have one angle equal to one
angle, the sides about other angles proportional <so that the sides
subtending
the equal angles are
homologous>...."
T h i s proposition is the extension to similar triangles o f the ambiguous
case
already mentioned as omitted by Euclid in relation to equality of triangles in
all respects (cf. note following 1. 2 6 , Vol. 1. p. 3 0 6 ) . T h e enunciation of vi. 7
has suggested the ordinary method of enunciating the ambiguous case where
equality and not similarity is in question. Cf. Todhunter's note on 1. 2 6 .
Another possible way o f presenting this proposition is given by Todhunter.
T h e essential theorem to prove i s :
If two triangles
have two sides of the one proportional
to two sides of the
other, and the angles opposite to one pair of corresponding
sides equal, the angles
which are opposite to the other pair of corresponding
sides shall either be equal or
be together equal to two right
angles.
For the angles included by the proportional sides must be either equal or
unequal.
I f they are equal, then, since the triangles have two angles of the one
equal to two angles o f the other, respectively, they are equiangular to one
another.
We have therefore only to consider the case in which the angles included
by the proportional sides are unequal.
The proof is, except at the end, like that of vi. 7.
Let the triangles ABC, DEF have the angle at A equal to the angle at D;
let AB be to BC
but let the angle ABC

as DE to EF,

be not equal to the angle

DEF.

A
T h e angles ACB, DFE shall be together equal to two right angles.
For one of the angles ABC, DEF must be the greater.
Let ABC b e the greater; and make the angle ABG equal to the angle
DEF.
T h e n we prove, as in vi. 7, that the triangles ABG, DEF ate: equiangular,
whence
AB is to BG as DE is to EF
But

AB is to BC as DE is to EF, by hypothesis.

Therefore
and the angle BGC

BG is equal to BC,
is equal to the angle

BCA.


