Now, since the triangles ABG,
the angle BGA

DEF~aie

equiangular,

is equal to the angle

EFD.

Add to them respectively the equal angles BGC, BCA; therefore the
angles BCA, EFD are together equal to the angles BGA, BGC, i.e. to two
right angles.
I t follows therefore that the angles BCA,
supplementary.

EFD

must be either equal or

But ( i ) , if each o f them is less than a right angle, they cannot be
supplementary, and they must therefore be e q u a l ;
( 2 ) if each o f them is greater than a right angle, they cannot
supplementary and must therefore be e q u a l ;
(3)

be

if one o f them is a right angle, they are supplementary and also equal.

Simson distinguishes the last case ( 3 ) in his enunciation: "then, if each o f
the remaining angles be either less or not less than a right angle, or if one of
them be a right

angle..."

T h e change is right, on the principle o f restricting the conditions to the
minimum necessary to enable the conclusion to be inferred. Simson adds a
separate proof of the case in which one o f the remaining angles is a right
angle.
" Lastly, let one o f the angles at C, F, viz. the angle at C, be a right angle;
in this case likewise the triangle ABC
is equiangular to the triangle DEF.
For, if they be not equiangular,
make, at the point B o f the straight
line AB, the angle ABG equal to the
angle DEF; then it may be proved,
as in the first case, that BG is equal
to BC.
But the angle BCG is a right
angle;
therefore the angle BGC is also a
right a n g l e ;
whence two o f the angles o f the tri­
angle BGC are together not less than
two right angles: which is impossible.
Therefore the triangle ABC is equiangular to the triangle
PROPOSITION

DEF."

8.

If in a right-angled triangle a perpendicular be drawn
from the right angle to the base, the triangles adjoining the
perpendicular are similar both to the whole and to one another.
Let ABC be a right-angled triangle having the angle
BAC right, and let AD be drawn from A perpendicular

to BC;
I say that each of the triangles ABD, ADC is similar to
the whole ABC and, further, they are similar to one another.

