to the angle at B, and so also is BA to AC, these sides
subtending the right angles ;
[vi. 4 ]
therefore the triangle ABD is similar to the triangle ADC.
[vi. Def. 1 ]

Therefore etc.
PORISM. From this it is clear that, if in a right-angled
triangle a perpendicular be drawn from the right angle to the
base, the straight line so drawn is a mean proportional
between the segments of the base.
Q. E. D.

Simson remarks on this proposition: " It seems plain that some editor
has changed the demonstration that Euclid gave o f this proposition: For,
after he has demonstrated that the triangles are equiangular to one another,
he particularly shows that their sides about the equal angles are proportionals,
as if this had not been done in the demonstration of prop. 4 of this b o o k :
this superfluous part is not found in the translation from the Arabic, and is
now left out."
This seems a little hypercritical, for the "particular showing" that the
sides about the equal angles are proportionals is really nothing more than
a somewhat full citation of vi. 4 . Moreover to shorten his proof still
more, Simson says, after proving that each o f the triangles ABD, ADC is
similar to the whole triangle ABC, " A n d the triangles ABD, ADC being
both equiangular and similar to ABC are equiangular and similar to one
another," thus assuming a particular case of vi. 2 1 , which might well be
proved here, as Euclid proves it, with somewhat more detail.
We observe that, here as generally, Euclid seems to disdain to give the
reader such small help as might be afforded by arranging the letters used to
denote the triangles so as to show the corresponding angular points in the
same order for each pair o f triangles; A is the first letter throughout, and the
other two for each triangle are in the order of the figure from left to right. I t
may be in compensation for this that he states at such length which side
corresponds to which when he comes to the proportions.
In the Greek texts there is an addition to the Porism inserted after
" ( B e i n g ) what it was required to prove," viz. " a n d further that between the
base and any one of the segments the side adjacent to the segment is a mean
proportional." Heiberg concludes that these words are an interpolation
( 1 ) because they come after the words oirtp ! 8 « 8ct£<u which as a rule follow the
Porism, ( 2 ) they are absent from the best Theonine MSS., though P and
Campanus have them without the oirtp ISti Sci£<u. Heiberg's view seems to
be confirmed by the fact noted by Austin, that, whereas the first part o f the
Porism is quoted later in vi. 1 3 , in the lemma before x . 3 3 and in the lemma
after x i n . 1 3 , the second part is proved in the former lemma, and elsewhere,
as also in Pappus (m. p. 7 2 , 9 — 2 3 ) .

PROPOSITION

9.

From a given straight line to cut off a prescribedpart.
Let AB be the given straight line ;
thus it is required to cut off from AB a prescribed part.


