5

Let the third part be that prescribed.
Let a straight line AC be drawn through from A con­
taining with AB any angle;
let a point D be taken at random on
AC, and let DE, EC be made equal
to AD.
[i. 3 ]

10

Let BC be joined, and through D
let DF be drawn parallel to it. [ 1 3 1 ]
Then, since FD has been drawn
parallel to BC, one of the sides of the triangle

ABC,

therefore, proportionally, as CD is to DA, so is BE to FA.
[vi. 2 ]

•5

But CD is double of DA ;
therefore BE is also double of FA ;
therefore BA

is triple of AF.

Therefore from the given straight line AB the prescribed
third part AF has been cut off.
Q. E. D.

6. a n y a n g l e . The expression here and in the two following propositions is Tvxovaa
•yuvla, corresponding exactly to Tv%bv arnutw which I have translated as " a point (taken)
at random"; but " a n angle (taken) at random" would not be so appropriate where it is a
question, not of taking Any angle at all, but of drawing a straight line casually so as to make
any angle with another straight line.
Simson observes that " this is demonstrated in a particular case, viz. that
in which the third part o f a straight line is required to be cut off; which is
not at all like Euclid's manner. Besides, the author of that demonstration,
from four magnitudes being proportionals, concludes that the third of them is
the same multiple of the fourth which the first is of the s e c o n d ; now this is
nowhere demonstrated in the 5 th book, as we now have i t ; but the editor
assumes it from the confused notion which the vulgar have o f proportionals."
T h e truth o f the assumption referred to is proved by Simson in his
proposition D given above (p. 1 2 8 ) ; hence he is
able to supply a general and legitimate proof
of the present proposition.
A
" L e t AB be the given straight l i n e ; it is
required to cut off any part from it.
F r o m the point A draw a straight line AC
making any angle with AB; in AC take any
point D, and take AC the same multiple o f AD
that AB is of the part which is to be cut off
from i t ;
join BC, and draw DE parallel to i t :
then AE is the part required to b e cut off.


