I t is true that vi. 1 4 is a particular c a s e o f vi. 2 3 , but, if either is out of
place, it is rather the latter that should be placed before vi. 1 4 , since most of
the propositions between vi. 1 5 and vi. 2 3 depend upon vi. 1 4 and 1 5 . B u t
is perfectly consistent with Euclid's manner to give a particular case first
and its extension later, and such an arrangement often has great advantages
in that it enables the more difficult parts o f a subject to b e led up to more
easily and gradually. Now, if D e Morgan's view were here followed, we
should, as it seems to me, be committing the mistake of explaining what is
relatively easy to understand, viz. two ratios of which one is the inverse o f
the other, by a more complicated conception, that of compound ratio. I n
other words, it is easier for a learner to realise the relation indicated by the
statement that the sides o f equal and equiangular parallelograms are "recipro­
cally proportional" than to form a conception of parallelograms such that
" the ratio compounded of the ratio of their sides is one o f equality." F o r
this" reason I would adhere to Euclid's arrangement.
T h e conclusion that, since DB, BE are placed in a straight line, FB, BG
are also in a straight line is referred to 1. 1 4 . T h e deduction is made clearer
by the following steps.
T h e angle DBF is equal to the angle
add to each the angle

GBE;

FBE;

therefore the angles DBF, FBE are together equal to the angles GBE,
FBE.
[C. N. 2 ]
But the angles DBF,
therefore the angles GBE,

FBE are together equal to two right angles,

[1. 1 3 ]

FBE are together equal to two right angles,
[C. N. 1 ]

and hence FB, BG are in one straight line.

[1. 1 4 ]

T h e result is also obvious from the converse o f 1. 1 5 given by Proclus
(see note on 1. 1 5 ) .
T h e proposition VI. 1 4 contains a theorem and one partial converse o f i t ;
so also does vi. 1 5 . T o each proposition may be added the other partial
converse, which may be enunciated as follows, the words in square brackets
applying to the case o f triangles (vi. 1 5 ) .
c

Equal parallelograms
[triangles]
which
each reciprocally proportional
are equiangular
sides either equal or
supplementary^]
Let

AB,

BC

have the sides about one angle in
[have the angles included by those

be equal parallelograms, or let FBD,

EBG

be equal

