But those equiangular parallelograms in which the sides
about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional are equal;
[vi. 1 4 ]

therefore the parallelogram BG is equal to the parallelogram

DH.
And BG is the rectangle AB, F, for A G is equal to F;
and DH is the rectangle CD, E, for E is equal to CH;
therefore the rectangle contained by AB, F is equal to the
rectangle contained by CD, E.
Next, let the rectangle contained by AB, F be equal to
the rectangle contained by CD, E;
I say that the four straight lines will be proportional, so that,
as AB is to CD, so is E to F.
For, with the same construction,
since the rectangle AB, Fis equal to the rectangle CD, E,
and the rectangle AB, F is BG, for AG is equal to F,
and the rectangle CD, E is DH, for CH is equal to E,
therefore BG is equal to DH.
And they are equiangular
But in equal and equiangular parallelograms the sides about
the equal angles are reciprocally proportional.
[vi. 1 4 ]
Therefore, as AB is to CD, so is CH to AG.
But CH is equal to E, and AG to F;
therefore, as AB is to CD, so is E to F.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.

T h i s proposition is a particular case o f vi. 1 4 , but one which is on all
accounts worth separate statement. It may also be enunciated in the follow­
ing form:
Rectangles
which have their bases reciprocally proportional
to their
heightsare equal in area; and equal rectangles have their bases reciprocally
proportional
to their
heights.
Since any parallelogram is equal to a rectangle o f the same height and
on the same base, and any triangle with the same height and on the same
base is equal to half the parallelogram or rectangle, it follows that
Equal
parallelograms
or triangles
have their bases reciprocally proportional
to their
heights and vice versa.
T h e present place is suitable for giving certain important propositions,
including those which Simson adds to B o o k vi. as Props. B , C and D , which
are proved directly by means o f vi. 1 6 .
1. Proposition B is a particular case o f the following theorem.
If a circle be circumscribed about a triangle A B C and there be drawn
through
A any two straight lines either both within or both without the angle B A C , viz.


