Therefore, proportionally,
as BA is to AE, so is BD to DC;
therefore the rectangle BA, DC is equal to the rectangle BD,
But it was also proved that

AE.

[vi- 4 ]
[vi. I 6 ]

the rectangle BC, AD is equal to the rectangle BD, CE;
therefore the rectangle AC, BD as a whole is equal to the sum of the
rectangles AB, DC and AD,
BC:
(being) what it was required to prove."
Another proof o f this proposition, and of its converse, is indicated by
Dr Lachlan (Elements
of Euclid, pp. 2 7 3 — 4 ) . I t depends on two preliminary
propositions.
( 1 ) If two circles be divided, by a chord in each, into segments which are
similar respectively, the chords are proportional
to the corresponding
diameters.
The proof is instantaneous i f we join the ends of each chord to the centre
of the circle which it divides, when we obtain two similar triangles.
( 2 ) IfDbe
any point on the circle circumscribed
about a triangle A B C , and
D X , D Y , D Z be perpendicular
to the sides B C , CA, A B of the
triangle
respectively, then X , Y , Z lie in one straight line ; and, conversely, / / the feet of
the perpendiculars
from any point D on the sides of a triangle lie in one straight
line, D lies on the circle circumscribed
about the triangle.
T h e proof depending on III. 2 1 , 2 2 is well known.
Now suppose that D is any point in the plane of a triangle ABC, and
that DX, D Y, DZ are perpendicular to the sides
BC, CA, AB respectively.
J o i n YZ, DA.
T h e n , since the angles at Y, Z are right,
A, Y, D, Z lie on a circle o f which DA is the
diameter.
And YZ divides this circle into segments which
are similar respectively to the segments into which
BC divides the circle circumscribing ABC, since
the angles ZA Y, BA C coincide, and their supple­
ments are equal.
Therefore, if d be the diameter o f the circle
circumscribing ABC,
BC is to d as YZ is to DA ;
and therefore the rectangle AD, BC is equal to the rectangle d, YZ.
Similarly the rectangle BD, CA is equal to the rectangle d, ZX, and the
rectangle CD, AB is equal to the rectangle d, XY.
Hence, in a quadrilateral in general, the rectangle
contained by the diagonals is less than the sum of the
rectangles contained by the pairs o f opposite sides.
Next, suppose that D lies on the circle circum­
scribed about ABC, but so that A, B, C, D follow
each other on the circle in this order, as in the figure
annexed.
Let DX, DY, DZ be perpendicular to BC, CA,
AB respectively, so that X, Y, Zare in a straight line.
Then, since the rectangles AD, BC; BD, CA; CD, AB are equal to the
rectangles d, YZ; d, ZX; d, XY respectively, and XZ is equal to the sum of

