Again, on the straight line BG, and at the points B, G on
it, let the angle BGH be constructed equal to the angle DFE,
and the angle GBH equal to the angle FDE.
[i. 2 3 ]
Therefore the remaining angle at E is equal to the re­
maining angle at H;
[1. 3 2 ]
therefore the triangle FDE is equiangular with the triangle

GBH;
therefore, proportionally, as FD

is to GB, so is EE to

GH, and ED to HB.

[yt 4 ]

But it was also proved that, as FD is to GB, so is EC to
GA, and CD to AB ;
therefore also, as EC is to A G, so is CD to AB, and EE
to GH, and further ED to HB.
And, since the angle CFD is equal to the angle AGB,
and the angle DFE to the angle BGH,
therefore the whole angle CFE is equal to the whole angle

AGH.
r or the same reason
the angle CDE is also equal to the angle

ABH.

And the angle at C is also equal to the angle at A,
and the angle at E to the angle at H.
Therefore AH is equiangular with CE ;
and they have the sides about their equal angles proportional;
therefore the rectilineal figure AH
rectilineal figure CE.

is similar to the
[vi. Def. 1 ]

Therefore on the given straight line AB the rectilineal
figure AH has been described similar and similarly situated
to the given rectilineal figure CE.
Q. E. D.

Simson thinks the proof of this proposition has been vitiated, his grounds
for this view being ( 1 ) that it is demonstrated only with reference to
quadrilaterals, and does not show how it may be extended to figures of five or
more sides, ( 2 ) that Euclid infers, from the fact of two triangles being
equiangular, that a side o f the one is to the corresponding side of the other as
another side o f the first is to the side corresponding to it in the other, i.e. he
permutes, without mentioning the fact that he does so, the proportions
obtained in vi. 4 , whereas the proof of the very next proposition gives, in a
similar case, the intermediate step o f permutation.
I think this is hypercriticism. As regards ( 2 ) it should be noted that the permuted form of the
proportion is arrived at first in the proof o f vi. 4 ; and the omission o f the


