intermediate step of altcrnando,
whether accidental or not, is o f no importance.
On the other hand, the use of this form of the proportion certainly simplifies
the proof o f the proposition, since it makes unnecessary the subsequent
ex aequali steps of Simson's proof, their place being taken by the inference
[v. n ] that ratios which are the same with a third ratio are the same with one
another.
Nor is the first objection o f any importance. We have only to take as the

A

B

C

D

given polygon a polygon of five sides at least, as CDEFG,
join one extremity
of CD, say D, to each of the angular points other than C and E, and then
use the same mode of construction as Euclid's for any number o f successive
triangles as ABL, LBK, etc., that may have to be made. Euclid's con­
struction and proof for a quadrilateral are quite sufficient to show how to deal
with the case o f a figure of five or any greater number o f sides.
Clavius has a construction which, given the power of moving a figure

bodily from one position to any other, is easier. CDEFG
being the given
polygon, join CE, CF. Place AB on CD so that A falls on C, and let B
fall on D, which may either lie on CD or on CD produced.
Now draw DE' parallel to DE, meeting CE, produced if necessary, in E ,
EF'
parallel to EF, meeting CF, produced if necessary, in F", and so on.
Let the parallel to the last side but one, FG, meet CG, produced if
necessary, in G'.
Then CDEF'G'
is similar and similarly situated to CDEFG,
and it is
constructed on CD, a straight line equal to AB.
The proof o f this is obvious.
A more general construction is indicated in the subjoined figure. I f
CDEFG
be the given polygon, suppose its angular points all joined to any
point O and the connecting straight lines produced both ways. Then, if CD,
a straight line equal to AB, be placed so that it is parallel to CD, and C, D
lie respectively on OC, OD (this can o f course be done by finding fourth
proportionals), we have only to draw DE,
EF,
etc., parallel to the
corresponding sides of the original polygon in the manner shown.
1

