VI. i ]
9

PROPOSITIONS

18, 19

But, as BC is to EF, so is EF to BG;
therefore also, as AB is to DE, so is EF to BG.

233

[v. n ]

15

Therefore in the triangles ABG, DEF the sides about
the equal angles are reciprocally proportional.
But those triangles which have one angle equal to one
angle, and in which the sides about the equal angles are
reciprocally proportional, are equal;
[vi. 1 5 ]
20 therefore the triangle ABG is equal to the triangle DEF.
Now since, as BC is to EF, so is EF to BG,
and, if three straight lines be proportional, the first has to
the third a ratio duplicate of that which it has to the second,
[v. Def. 9 ]

therefore BC has to BG a ratio duplicate of that which CB
25 has to EF.
But, as CB is to BG, so is the triangle ABC to the
triangle ABG ;
[vi. 1 ]
therefore the triangle ABC also has to the triangle ABG a
ratio duplicate of that which BC has to EF.
30
But the triangle ABG is equal to the triangle DEF;
therefore the triangle ABC also has to the triangle DEF
ratio duplicate of that which BC has to EF.

a

Therefore etc.
PORISM. From this it is manifest that, if three straight
35 lines be proportional, then, as the first is to the third, so is
the figure described on the first to that which is similar and
similarly described on the second.
Q. E. D.

4. a n d s u c h that, a s A B i s to B C , s o i s D E t o E F , literally "(triangles) having
the angle at B equal to the angle at E, and (having), as AB to BC, so DE to EF."
Having combined Prop. 1 8 and the first part o f Prop. 2 0 as just indicated,
De Morgan would tack on to Prop. 1 9 the second part o f Prop. 2 0 , which
asserts that, if similar polygons b e divided into the same number o f similar
triangles, the triangles are " homologous to the wholes " (in the sense that the
polygons have the same ratio as the corresponding triangles have), and that
the polygons are to one another in the duplicate ratio o f corresponding sides.
This again, though no doubt an improvement of form, would necessitate the
drawing over again of the figure o f the altered Proposition 1 8 and a certain
amount of repetition.
Agreeably to his suggestion that Prop. 2 3 should come before Prop. 1 4
which is a particular case o f it, D e Morgan would prove Prop. 1 9 for
parallelograms
by means of Prop. 2 3 , and thence infer the truth o f it for


