triangles or the halves of the parallelograms. H e adds : " T h e method of
Euclid is an elegant application of the operation requisite to compound equal
ratios, by Which the conception of the process is lost sight of." For the
general reason given in the note on VI. 1 4 above, I think that Euclid showed
the sounder discretion in the arrangement which he adopted.
Moreover it is
not easy to see how performing the actual operation of compounding two
equal ratios can obscure the process, or the fact that two equal ratios are
being compounded.
On the definition of compounded ratios and duplicate
ratio, De Morgan has himself acutely pointed out that " composition " is here
used for the process o f detecting the single alteration which produces the
effect o f two or more, the duplicate ratio being the result o f compounding two
equal ratios. T h e proof o f vi. 1 9 does in fact exhibit the single alteration
which produces the effect of two. And the operation was of the essence of
the Greek geometry, because it was the manipulation of ratios in this manner,
by simplification and transformation, that gave it so much power, as every one
knows who has read, say, Archimedes or Apollonius. H e n c e the introduction
of the necessary operation, as well as the theoretical proof, in this proposition
seems to me to have been distinctly worth while, and, as it is somewhat
simpler in this case than in the more general case of VI. 2 3 , it was in
accordance with the plan o f enabling the difficulties of Book VI. to be more
easily and gradually surmounted to give the simpler case first.
That Euclid wished to emphasise the importance of the method adopted,
as well as of the result obtained, in vi. 1 9 seems to me clearly indicated by
the Porism which follows the proposition.
It is as if he should say : " I have
shown you that simitar triangles are to one another in the duplicate ratio of
corresponding sides; but I have also shown you incidentally how it is possible
to work conveniently with duplicate ratios, viz. by transforming them into
simple ratios between straight lines. I shall have occasion to illustrate the
use of this method in the proof of vi. 2 2 . "
T h e Porism to vi. 1 9 presents one difficulty. I t will be observed that it
speaks of the figure (etoos) described on the first straight line and of that which
is similar and similarly described on the second.
I f " f i g u r e " could be
regarded as loosely used for the figure of the proposition,
i.e. for a triangle,
there would be no difficulty. I f on the other hand " the figure " means any
rectilineal figure, i.e. any polygon, the Porism is not really established until
the next proposition, vi. 2 0 , has been proved, and therefore it is out of place
here. Y e t the correction Tpiymvov, triangle, for eKo?, figure, is due to T h e o n
a l o n e ; P and Campanus have " figure," and the reading of Philoponus and
Psellus, •tetpa.ywvov, square, partly supports eTSos, since it can be reconciled with
«Sos but not with t y t y — r .
Again the second Porism to vi. 2 0 , in which this
Porism is reasserted for any rectilineal figure, and which is omitted by
Campanus and only given by P in the margin, was probably interpolated by
T h e o n . Heiberg concludes that Euclid wrote " f i g u r e " (etSos), and Theon,
seeing the difficulty, changed the word into " t r i a n g l e " here and added Por. 2
to vi. 2 0 in order to make the matter clear. I f one may hazard a guess as to
how Euclid made the slip, may it be that he first put it after vi 2 0 and then,
observing that the expression o f the duplicate ratio by a single ratio between
two straight lines does not come in vi. 2 0 but in vi. 1 9 , moved the Porism to
the end of vi. 1 9 in order to make the connexion clearer, without noticing
that, if this were done, tloos would need correction ?
T h e following explanation at the end o f the Porism is bracketed by
Heiberg, viz. " Since it was proved that, as CB is to BG, so is the triangle

