100

i o

But the triangle ABE has to the triangle FGL a ratio
duplicate of that which the corresponding side AB has to the
corresponding side FG; for similar triangles are in the
duplicate ratio of the corresponding sides.
[vi. 1 9 ]
Therefore the polygon ABCDE also has to the polygon
5 FGHKL a ratio duplicate of that which the corresponding
side AB has to the corresponding side FG.
Therefore etc.

PORISM. Similarly also it can be proved in the case of
quadrilaterals that they are in the duplicate ratio of the
no corresponding sides. And it was also proved in the case of
triangles; therefore also, generally, similar rectilineal figures
are to one another in the duplicate ratio of the corresponding
sides.
Q. E. D.

1. in t h e s a m e ratio a s t h e w h o l e s . T h e same word opiXoyos is used which I have
generally translated by " corresponding." But here it is followed by a dative, oySKoyo. rot*
tfXoij " homologous with the wholes," instead of being used absolutely. T h e meaning can
therefore here be nothing else but " i n the same ratio w i t h " or "proportional to the
w h o l e s " ; and Euclid seems to recognise that he is making a special use of the word,
because he explains it lower down (1. 46): " t h e triangles are homologous to the wholes, that
is, in such manner that the triangles are proportional, and ABE, EBC, ECD are ante­
cedents, while FGL, LGH, LHK are their consequents."
49. f T ^ f j - a aiiriov, "their consequents," is a little awkward, but may be supposed to
indicate which triangles correspond to which as consequent to antecedent.
An alternative proof o f the second part of this proposition given after the
Porisms is relegated by August and Heiberg to an Appendix as an interpolation.
It is shorter than the proof in the text, and is the only one given by many
editors, including Clavius, Billingsley, Barrow and Simson. I t runs as follows:
" W e will now also prove that the triangles are homologous in another and
an easier manner.

Again, let the polygons ABCDE,
FGHKL
be set out, and let BE, EC,
LH be joined.
I say that, as the triangle ABE is to FGL, so is EBC to LGH and CDF
to HKL.
For, since the triangle ABE is similar to the triangle FGL, the triangle
ABE
has to.the triangle FGL a ratio duplicate o f that which BE has to GL.
GL,


