F o r the same reason also
the triangle BEC has to the triangle GLH
BE has to GL.
Therefore, as the triangle ABE
to

a ratio duplicate of that which

is to the triangle FGL,

so is

BEC

GLH

Again, since the triangle EBC is similar to the triangle LGH,
EBC
has to LGH a ratio duplicate of that which the straight line CE has
to HL.
For the same reason also
the triangle ECD has to the triangle LHK a ratio duplicate of that which
CE has to HL.
Therefore, as the triangle EBC is to LGH, so is ECD
But it was proved that,
as EBC is to LGH, so also is ABE to FGL.
Therefore also, as ABE

is to FGL,

so is BEC

to

LHK.

to GLH

and ECD

to

LHK.

Q. E. D.

Now Euclid cannot fail to have noticed that the second part of his
proposition could be proved in this way. It seems therefore that, in giving
the other and longer method, he deliberately wished to avoid using the result
of vi. 1 9 , preferring to prove the first two parts o f the theorem, as they can be
proved, independently o f any relation between the areas o f similar triangles.
T h e first part of the Porism, stating that the theorem is true of
quadrilaterals,
would be superfluous but for the fact that technically, -according to Book 1.
Def. 1 9 , the term "polygon" (or figure of many sides, iro\vTr\ivftov)
used in the
enunciation of the proposition is confined to rectilineal figures of more than
four sides, so that a quadrilateral might seem to be excluded. T h e mention
of the triangle in addition fills up the tale of " similar rectilineal figures."
T h e second Porism, Theon's interpolation, given in the text by the editors,
but bracketed by Heiberg, is as follows:
" And, if we take O a third proportional to AB, FG, then BA has to O a
ratio duplicate of that which AB has to FG.
But the polygon has also to the polygon, or the quadrilateral to the
quadrilateral, a ratio duplicate of that which the corresponding side has to
the corresponding side, that is AB to FG;
and this was proved in the case of triangles a l s o ;
so that it is also manifest generally that, if three straight lines be proportional,
as the first is to the third, so will the figure described on the first be to the
similar and similarly described figure on the second."

PROPOSITION 

2 1 .

Figures which, are similar to the same rectilineal figure
are also similar to one another.
For let each of the rectilineal figures A, B be similar to C;
I say that A is also similar to B.


