BOOK

242

VI

[VI. 2 2

And, since, as AB is to CD, so is EF to QR,
while QR is equal to GH,
therefore, as AB is to CD, so is EF to GH.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.

T h e second assumption in the first step of the first part of the proof, viz.
that, as CD is to O, so GH to P, should perhaps be explained. It is a
deduction [by v. n ] from the facts that

and

AB

is to CD as CD to

EF

is to GHas

0,

GH to P,

AB is to CD as EF

to

GH.

T h e defect in the proof of this proposition is well known, namely the
assumption, without proof, that, because the figures NH, SB are equal,
besides being similar and similarly situated, their corresponding sides GH, QR
are equal. H e n c e the minimum addition necessary to make the proof
complete is a proof o f a lemma to the effect that, if two similar figures are also
equal, any pair of corresponding
sides are equal.
T o supply this lemma is one alternative; another is to prove, as a
preliminary proposition, a much more general theorem, viz. that, if the
duplicate
ratios of two ratios are equal, the two ratios are themselves
equal.
When this is proved, the second part o f VI. 2 2 is an immediate infeience from
it, and the effect is, o f course, to substitute a new proof instead of
supplementing Euclid's.
I. I t is to b e noticed that the lemma required as a minimum is very like
what is needed to supplement vi. 2 8 and 2 9 , in the proofs of which Euclid
assumes that, if two similar parallelograms
are unequal, any side in the greater
is greater than the corresponding
side in the smaller.
Therefore, on the whole, it
seems preferable to adopt the alternative o f proving the simpler lemma which
will serve to supplement all three proofs, viz. that, if of two similar
rectilineal
figures the first is greater than, equal to, or less than, the second, any side of the
first is greater
than, equal to, or less than, the corresponding
side of the second
respectively.
T h e case o f equality of the figures is the case required for vi. 2 2 ; and the
proof o f it is given in the Greek text after the proposition. Since to give such
a " lemma " after the proposition in which it is required is contrary to Euclid's
manner, Heiberg concludes that it is an interpolation, though it is earlier than
Theon. T h e lemma runs thus :
" B u t that, if rectilineal figures be equal and similar, their corresponding
sides are equal to one another we will prove thus.
Let NH,

SR be equal and similar rectilineal figures, and suppose that,
as HG is to GN, so is RQ to

I say that

RQ is equal to HG.

For, if they are unequal, one o f them is greater;
let RQ be greater than

HG.

QS;


