Then, since, as RQ is to QS, so is HG to GN,
alternately also, as RQ is to HG, so is QS to
and QR is greater than

GN;

HG;

therefore

QS is also greater than

GN;

so that

RS is also greater than

HN*.

But it is also e q u a l : which is impossible.
Therefore (X/? is not unequal to Cr^T;
therefore it is equal to it."
[The step marked * is easy to see if it is remembered that it is only
necessary to prove its truth in the case of triangles (since similar polygons are
divisible into the same number o f similar and similarly situated triangles
having the same ratio to each other respectively as the polygons have). I f the
triangles be applied to each other so that the two corresponding sides of each,
which are used in the question, and the angles included by them coincide,
the truth o f the inference is obvious.]
T h e lemma might also be arrived at by proving that, if a ratio is greater
than
a ratio of equality, the ratio which is- its duplicate is also greater than a ratio of
equality; and if the ratio which is duplicate of another ratio is greater than a
ratio of equality, the ratio of which it is the duplicate is also greater than a ratio
of equality.
It is not difficult to prove this from the particular case of v. 2 5 in
which the second magnitude is equal to the third, i.e. from the fact that in
this case the sum o f the extreme terms is greater than double the middle term.
I I . We now come to the alternative which substitutes a new proof for the
second part of the proposition, making the whole proposition an immediate
inference from one to which it is practically equivalent, viz. that
( 1 ) If two ratios
versely, if the duplicate

be equal, their duplicate ratios are equal, and ( 2 ) con­
ratios of two ratios be equal, the ratios are equal.

T h e proof of part ( 1 ) is after the manner of Euclid's own proof of the first
part of vi. 2 2 .
Let A be to B as C to D,
and let A" be a third proportional to A, B, and F a third proportional to C, D,
so that
A is to B as B to X,
and

C is to D as D to

Y;

whence

A is to X in the duplicate ratio of A to B,

and

C is to Y in the duplicate ratio o f C to D.
Since

A is to B as C is to D,

and

B is to X as A is to B,
i.e. as C is to D,
,
i.e. as D is to Y,

therefore, ex aequali,

r
1

,
[v. n ]
J

A is to X as C is to Y.

Part ( 2 ) is much more difficult and is the crux o f the whole thing.
Most of the proofs'depend on the assumption that, B being any magnitude
and P and Q two magnitudes of the same kind, there does exist a magnitude
A which is to B in the same ratio as P to Q. It is this same assumption

