Just as vi. 2 3 exhibits the operation necessary for compounding
two
ratios, a proposition ( 8 ) o f the Data indicates the operation by which we may
divide one ratio by another. T h e proposition proves that Things
which
have a given ratio to the same thing have also a given ratio to one another.
Euclid's procedure is o f course to compound one ratio with the inverse of the
other; but, when this is once done and the result o f Prop. 8 obtained, he
uses the result in the later propositions as a substitute for the method o f
composition. Thus he uses the division o f ratios, instead o f composition,
in the propositions o f the Data which deal with the same subject-matter as
vi. 2 3 . T h e effect is to represent the ratio of two equiangular parallelograms
as a ratio between straight lines one o f which is one side of one of the
parallelograms.
Prop. 5 6 of the Data shows us that, if we want to express
the ratio of the parallelogram AC to the parallelogram CF in the figure

of vi. 2 3 in the form of a ratio in which, for example, the side BC is the
antecedent term, the required ratio of the parallelograms is BC : X, where
DC

: CE = CG : X,

or X is a fourth proportional to X>Cand the two sides o f the parallelogram CF.
Measure CK along CB, produced if necessary, so that
DC:

CE=CG:

CK

(whence CK is equal to X).
[This may be simply done by joining DG
to it meeting CB in K.]
Complete the parallelogram
Then, since
the parallelograms DK,
Therefore

and then drawing EK

parallel

AK.

DC : CE = CG : CK,
CFare

equal.

(AC):

(CF) = (AC)
= BC:

[vi. 1 4 ]
: (DK)

[v. 7 ]

CK

[vi. 1 ]

= BC : X.
Prop. 6 8 of the Data uses the same construction to prove that, If two
equiangular parallelograms
have to one another a given ratio, and one side have
to one side a given ratio, the remaining side will also have to the remaining
side
a given
ratio.
I do not use the figure o f the Data but, for convenience' sake, I adhere
to the figure given above. Suppose that the ratio o f the parallelograms is
given, and also that of CD to CE.
Apply to CD the parallelogram DK equal to CF and such that CK, CB
coincide in direction.
[1. 4 5 ]
Then the ratio of AC to KD is given, being equal to that o f AC to CF.
And
(AC) : (KD) = CB : CK;
therefore the ratio of CB to CK is given.

