that, when we have proved by VI. 2 the fact that the sides about the common
angle are proportional, we can infer the proportionality o f the other sides
directly from 1. 3 4 combined with v. 7. But it does not seem to me unnatural
that Euclid should ( 1 ) deliberately refrain from making any use o f I. 3 4 and
( 2 ) determine beforehand that he would prove the sides proportional in a
definite order beginning with the sides EA, AG and BA, AD about the
common angle and then taking the remaining sides in the order indicated
by the order of the letters A, G, F, E.
Given that Euclid started the proof
with such a fixed intention in his mind, the course taken presents no difficulty,
nor is the proof unsystematic or unduly drawn out. And its genuineness
seems to me supported by the fact that the proof, when once the first two
sides about the common angle have been disposed of, follows closely the
order and method o f VI. 1 8 . Moreover, it could readily be adapted to the
more general case of two polygons having a common angle and the other
corresponding sides respectively parallel.
T h e parallelograms in the proposition are o f course similarly situated as
well as similar; and those " a b o u t the d i a m e t e r " may be " a b o u t " the
diameter produced
as well as about the diameter itself.
From the first part of the proof it follows that parallelograms which have
one angle equal to one angle and the sides about those angles proportional
are similar.
Prop. 2 6 is the converse of Prop. 2 4 , and there seems to be no reason
why they should be separated as they are in the text by the interposition o f
vi. 2 5 . Campanus has VI. 2 4 and 2 6 as vi. 2 2 and 2 3 respectively, vi. 2 3 as
vi. 2 4 , and vi. 2 5 as we have it.

PROPOSITION

25.

To construct one and the same figure similar to a given
rectilineal figure and equal to another given rectilineal figure.
Let ABC be the given rectilineal figure to which the
figure to be constructed must be similar, and D that to which
it must be equal;
thus it is required to construct one and the same figure similar
to ABC and equal to D.

Let there be applied to BC the parallelogram BE equal
to the triangle ABC [1. 4 4 ] , and to CE the parallelogram CM
equal to D in the angle FCE which is equal to the angle
CBL.

[1.45]

