Therefore BC is in a straight line with CF, and LE with

EM.
Now let GH be taken a mean proportional to BC, CF
[vi. 13J, and on GHlet KGH be described similar and similarlysituated to ABC.
[vi. 1 8 ]
Then, since, as BC is to GH, so is GH to CF,
and, if three straight lines be proportional, as the first is to
the third, so is the figure on the first to the similar and
similarly situated figure described on the second, [vi. 19, P o r ]
therefore, as BC is to CF, so is the triangle ABC to the
triangle KGH.
But, as BC is to CF, so also is the parallelogram BE to
the parallelogram EF.
[vi. 1 ]
Therefore also, as the triangle ABC is to the triangle
KGH, so is the parallelogram BE to the parallelogram EF;
therefore, alternately, as the triangle ABC is to the parallelo­
gram BE, so is the triangle KGH to the parallelogram EF.
[v. 1 6 ]

But the triangle ABC is equal to the parallelogram BE;
therefore the triangle KGH is also equal to the parallelogram

EF.
But the parallelogram EF is equal to D ;
therefore KGH is also equal to D.
And KGH is also similar to ABC.
Therefore one and the same figure KGH has been con­
structed similar to the given rectilineal figure ABC and equal
to the other given figure D.
Q. E. D.

3. t o w h i c h t h e figure t o be c o n s t r u c t e d m u s t b e s i m i l a r , literally " t o which it
is required to construct (one) similar," j let Snowy avoTfyairOai.
T h i s is the highly important problem which Pythagoras is credited with
having solved. Compare the passage from Plutarch (Symp. v m . 2, 4 ) quoted
in the note on 1. 4 4 above, Vol. 1. pp. 3 4 3 — 4 .
We are bidden to construct a rectilineal figure which shall have the form of
one and the size o f another rectilineal figure. T h e corresponding proposition
of the Data, Prop. 5 5 , asserts that, " i f an area (x<«/HOV) be given in form
( « 8 « i ) and in magnitude, its sides will also be given in magnitude."
Simson sees signs o f corruption in the text of this proposition also. In
the first place, the proof speaks of the triangle ABC, though, according to the
enunciation, the figure for which ABC is taken may be any rectilineal figure,
tiOvypa/x/iov "rectilineal figure" would be more correct, or cloos, "figure"; the
mistake, however, of using rpiymvov is not one of great importance, being no


