We have already (note on 1. 4 4 ) seen the significance, in Greek geometry,
of the theory o f " the application of areas, their exceeding and their fallingshort." In 1. 4 4 it was a question o f "applying to a given straight line
(exactly, without ' e x c e s s ' or 'defect') a parallelogram equal to a given
rectilineal figure, in a given angle."
Here, in vi. 2 7 — 2 9 , it is a question
of parallelograms applied to a straight line but "deficient
(or exceeding)
by
parallelograms
situated
to a

similar
given

and
similarly
parallelogram."

Apart from size, it is easy to construct
any number o f parallelograms " d e ­
ficient" or " e x c e e d i n g " in the manner
described.
Given the straight line
AB to which the parallelogram has to
I
Z__„^/
be applied, we describe on the base
"
\
CB, where C is on AB, or on BA
produced beyond A, any parallelogram " similarly situated " and either equal
or similar to the given parallelogram (Euclid takes the similar and similarly
situated parallelogram on half ihe line), draw the diagonal BD, take on it
(produced if necessary) any points as E, K, draw EF, or KL, parallel to CD
to meet AB or AB produced and complete the parallelograms, as AH, ML.
I f the point E is taken on BD or BD produced beyond D, it must be so
taken that EF meets AB between A and B.
Otherwise the parallelogram
AE
would not be applied to AB itself, as it is required to be.
T h e parallelograms BD, BE, being about the same diameter, are similar
[vi. 2 4 ] , and BE is the defect of the parallelogram AE relatively to AB.
AE is then a parallelogram applied to AB but deficient by a parallelogram
similar and similarly situated to BD.
I f K is on DB produced, the parallelogram BK is similar to BD, but it
is the excess of the parallelogram AK relatively to the base AB.
AK is a
parallelogram applied to AB but exceeding by a parallelogram similar and
similarly situated to BD.
T h u s it is seen that BD produced both ways is the locus of points, such
as E or K, which determine, with the direction o f CD, the position of A, and
the direction o f AB, parallelograms applied to AB and deficient or exceeding
by parallelograms similar and similarly situated to the given parallelogram.
T h e importance of VI, 2 7 — 2 9 from a historical point of view cannot be
overrated. T h e y give the geometrical equivalent of the algebraical solution
of the most general form of quadratic equation when that equation has a real
and positive root. It will also enable us to find a real negative root of a
quadratic equation ; for such an equation can, by altering the sign of x, be
turned into another with a real positive root, when the geometrical method
again becomes applicable. I t will also, as we shall see, enable us to represent
both roots when both are real and positive, and therefore to represent both
roots when both are real but either positive or negative.
T h e method o f these propositions was constantly used by the Greek
geometers in the solution of problems, and they constitute the foundation o f
B o o k x . of the Elements
and of Apollonius' treatment o f the conic sections.
Simson's observation on the subject is entirely justified. H e says namely on
vi. 2 8 , 2 9 : " T h e s e two problems, to the first of which the 2 7 t h Prop, is
necessary, are the most general and useful o f all in the Elements, and are
most frequently made use o f by the ancient geometers in the solution o f
other problems; and therefore are very ignorantly left out by Tacquet and
N

K

