Let GQB be their diameter, and let the figure be described.
Then, since BG is equal to C, KM,
and in them GQ is equal to KM,
therefore the remainder, the gnomon UWV, is equal to tht
remainder C.
And, since PR is equal to OS,
let QB L e added to each ;
therefore the whole PB is equal to the whole OB.
But OB is equal to TE, since the side AE is also equal
to the side EB;
[i. 3 ]
therefore TE is also equal to PB.
Let OS be added to each ;
therefore the whole TS is equal to the whole, the gnomon
6

VWU.
But the gnomon VWU was proved equal to C;
therefore TS is also equal to C.
Therefore to the given straight line AB there has been
applied the parallelogram ST equal to the given rectilineal
figure C and deficient by a parallelogrammic figure QB which
is similar to D.
Q. E. F.

T h e second part of the enunciation of this proposition which states the

Siopi<Tfi6<; appears to have been considerably amplified, but not improved in
the process, by Theon. His version would read as follows. " But the given
rectilineal figure, that namely to which the applied parallelogram must be
equal (<S 8ei lo-ov vapapaXtiv), must not be greater than that applied to the half
(iraoa/SaAAo/icYov instead of avaypatfropivov), the defects being similar, (namely)
that ( o f the parallelogram applied) to the half and that (of the required
parallelogram) which must have a similar defect" (6/ioiW o n w i w eAAei/iparwv rov rt dm TIJS ij/i«r«'as xal <S Sti SpMiov eWtlrrfiv). T h e first amplification
" t h a t to which the applied parallelogram must be equal" is quite unnecessary,
since " the given rectilineal figure" could mean nothing else. T h e above
attempt at a translation will show how difficult it is to make sense of the
words at the end , they speak of two defects apparently and, while one may
well be the "defect on the half," the other can hardly be tie given
parallelogram
" t o which the defect (of the required parallelogram) must be similar." Clearly
the reading given above (from P) is by far the better.
In this proposition and the next there occurs the tacit assumption (already
alluded to in the note on vi. 2 2 ) that if, of two similar parallelograms,
one is
greater than the other, either side of the greater is greater than the corresponding
side of the less.


