But it is also equiangular with it;
therefore in BF, AD the sides about the equal angles are
reciprocally proportional;
[vi. 1 4 ]
therefore, as FE is to ED, so is AE to EB.
But FE is equal to AB, and ED to AE.
Therefore, as BA is to AE, so is AE to EB.
And AB is greater than AE ;
therefore AE is also greater than EB.
Therefore the straight line AB has been cut in extreme
and mean ratio at E, and the greater segment of it is AE.
Q. E. D.

It will be observed that the construction in the text is a direct application
of the preceding Prop. 2 9 in the particular case where the excess of the
parallelogram which is applied is a square.
T h i s fact coupled with the
position o f VI. 3 0 is a sufficient indication that the construction is Euclid's.
In one place Theon appears to have amplified the argument. T h e text
above says " B u t FE is equal to AB" while the M S S . B , F , V and p have
" But FE is equal to A C, that is, to AB."
T h e M S S . give after oVe» eo« irotrja-ai an alternative construction which
Heiberg relegates to the Appendix. T h e text-books give this construction
alone and leave out the other. I t will be remembered that the alternative
proof does no more than refer to the equivalent construction in 11. i t .
" L e t AB be cut at C so that the rectangle AB, BC is equal to the
square on CA.
[11. 1 1 J
Since then the rectangle AB, BC is equal to the square on CA,
therefore, as BA is to AC, so is AC to CB.
[vi. 1 7 ]
Therefore AB has been cut in extreme and mean ratio at C."
It is intrinsically improbable that this alternative construction was added
to the other by Euclid himself. I t is however just the kind of interpolation
that might be expected from an editor. I f Euclid had preferred the alternative
construction, he would have been more likely to give it alone.

PROPOSITION 

3 1 .

In right-angled triangles the figure on the side subtending
the right angle is equal to the similar and similarly described
figures on the sides containing the right angle.
Let ABC be a right-angled triangle having the angle BAC
right;
I say that the figure on BC is equal to the similar and
similarly described figures on BA, AC.
Let AD be drawn perpendicular.
Then since, in the right-angled triangle ABC, AD has


