BOOK
ABC
is a triangle.
From D draw DE

VI

[vi. 3 2

From C draw CD parallel to BA and of any length.
parallel to CA and of such length that
CD

: DE

= BA

: AC.

T h e n the triangles ABC, ECD, which have the angular point C common
literally satisfy Euclid's enunciation; but by no possi­
bility can CE be in a straight line with CB if, as
E
in the case supposed, the angles included by the
corresponding sides are supplementary (unless both are
right angles). H e n c e the included angles must be
/
\
I )D
equal, so that the triangles must be similar.
That
being so, if they are to have nothing more than one
angular point common, and two pairs of corresponding
sides are to be parallel
as distinguished from one or both being in the same
straight line, the triangles can only be placed so that the corresponding sides
in both are on the same side of the third side of either, and the sides (other
than the third sides) which meet at the common angular point are not corre­
sponding sides.
Todhunter remarks that the proposition seems of no use. Presumably he
did not know that it is used by Euclid himself in x m . 1 7 . T h i s is so
however, and therefore it was not necessary, as several writers have thought, to
do away with the proposition and find a substitute which should be more useful.
1. D e Morgan proposes this theorem : " I f two similar triangles be placed
with their bases parallel, and the equal angles at the bases towards the same
parts, the other sides are parallel, each to e a c h ; or one pair o f sides are in
the same straight line and the other pair are parallel."
2. Dr Lachlan substitutes the somewhat similar theorem, " I f two similar
triangles be placed so that two sides of
the one are parallel to the corresponding
sides of the other, the third sides are
parallel."
But it is to b e observed that these
propositions can be proved without
using Book VI. at a l l ; they can be
proved from Book I., and the triangles
may as well be called "equiangular"
simply. I t is true that Book vi. is no more than formally necessary to
Euclid's proposition. H e merely uses vi. 6 because his enunciation does not
say that the triangles are similar; and he only proves them to be similar in
order to conclude that they are equiangular. From this point o f view
Mr Taylor's substitute seems the best, viz.
3.
" I f two triangles have sides parallel in pairs, the straight lines joining
the corresponding vertices meet in a point,
or are parallel."
Simson has a theory (unnecessary in
the circumstances) as to the possible
object of vi. 3 2 as it stands.
H e points
out that the enunciation of vi. 2 6 might
be more general so as to cover the case
of similar and similarly situated parallelo­
grams with equal angles not coincident
but vertically opposite. I t can then be proved that the diagonals drawn

