therefore, whatever multiple the circumference BL is of BC,
that multiple also is the angle BGL of the angle BGC.
For the same reason also,
whatever multiple the circumference NE is of EF, that
multiple also is the angle NHE
of the angle EHF.
If then the circumference BL is equal to the circumference
EN, the angle BGL is also equal to the angle EHN;
[lit. 2 7 ]
if the circumference BL is greater than the circumference
EN, the angle BGL is also greater than the angle
EHN;
and, if less, less.
There being then four magnitudes, two circumferences
BC, EF, and two angles BGC,
EHF,
there have been taken, of the circumference BC and the angle
BGC equimultiples, namely the circumference BL and the
angle BGL,
and of the circumference EF and the angle EHF
equi­
multiples, namely the circumference EN and the angle EHN.
And it has been proved that,
if the circumference BL is in excess of the circumference EN,
the angle BGL is also in excess of the angle
EHN;
if equal, equal;
and if less, less.
Therefore, as the circumference BC is to EF, so is the
angle BGC to the angle EHF.
[v. Def. 5 ]
But, as the angle BGC is to the angle EHF, so is the
angle BAC to the angle EDF;
for they are doubles respec­
tively.
Therefore also, as the circumference BC is to the circum­
ference EF, so is the angle BGC to the angle EHF, and
the angle BA C to the angle EDF.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.

This proposition as generally given includes a second part relating to sectors
of circles, corresponding to the following words added to the enunciation:
" and further the sectors, as constructed at the centres" (Iri ot koX 01 -rowels a r t
[or ofrf] Trpos TOIS K£vrpoi5 <Tw«rra/«i<ot). There is of course a corresponding
addition to the "definition" or "particular statement," " a n d further the sector
GBOC
to the sector HEQF."
These additions are clearly due to Theon, as
may be gathered from his own statement in his commentary on the /iadrjiiarucy
<rvvra$is of Ptolemy, " But that sectors in equal circles are to one another as
the angles on which they stand, has been proved by me in my edition of the


