
Elements at the end of the sixth book." Campanus omits them, and P has them
only in a later hand in the margin or between the lines. Theon's proof scarcely
needs to be given here in full, as it can easily be supplied. From the equality
of the arcs BC, CK he infers [ i n . 2 9 ] the equality of the chords BC, CK.
Hence, the radii being equal, the triangles GBC, GCK are equal in all
respects [1. 8 , 4 ] . Next, since the arcs BC, CK are equal, so are the arcs
BAC,
CAK.
Therefore the angles at the circumference subtended by the
latter, i.e. the angles in the segments BOC, CPK, are equal [in. 2 7 ] , and the
segments are therefore similar [ill. Def.. 1 1 } and equal [in. 2 4 ] .
Adding to the equal segments the equal triangles GBC, GCK respectively,
we see that
the sectors GBC, GCK axe. equal.
Thus, in equal circles, sectors standing on equal arcs are e q u a l ; and the rest
of the proof proceeds as in Euclid's proposition.
As regards Euclid's proposition itself, it will be noted that ( 1 ) , besides
quoting the theorem in in. 2 7 that in equal circles angles which stand on
equal arcs are equal, the proof assumes that the angle standing on a greater
arc is greater and that standing on a less arc is less. T h i s is indeed a suffi­
ciently obvious deduction from III. 2 7 .
( 2 ) Any equimultiples whatever are taken of the angle BGC and the arc
BC, and any equimultiples whatever
of the angle EHF and the arc EF.
(Accordingly the words "any equimultiples
whatever" should have been used in
the step immediately preceding the inference that the angles are proportional
to the arcs, where the text merely states that there have been taken of the
circumference BC and the angle BGC equimultiples
BL and BGL.)
But, if
any multiple of an angle is regarded as being itself an angle, it follows that the
restriction in 1. Deff. 8 , 1 0 , n , 12 o f the term angle to an angle less than two
right angles is implicitly given u p ; as De Morgan says, " the angle breaks
prison." Mr Dodgson (Euclid
and his Modern Rivals,
p. 1 9 3 ) argues that
Euclid conceived of the multiple o f an angle as so many separate angles not
added together into one, and that, when it is inferred that, where two such
multiples of an angle are equal, the arcs subtended are also equal, the argu­
ment is that the sum total of the first set of angles is equal to the sum total
of the second set, and hence the second set can b e broken up and put
together again in such amounts as to make a set equal, each to each, to the
first set, and then the sum total of the arcs will evidently be equal also. I f
on the other hand the multiples of the angles are regarded as single angular
magnitudes, the equality of the subtending arcs is not inferrible directly from
Euclid, because his proof o f III. 2 6 only applies to cases where the angle is
less than the sum of two right angles. (As a matter o f fact, it is a question of
inferring equality of angles or multiples o f angles from equality o f arcs, and
not the converse, so that the reference should have been to ill. 2 7 , but this
does not affect the question at issue.) O f course it is against this view of
Mr Dodgson that Euclid speaks throughout o f " the angle B G L " and " the
angle E H N " (17 VTO B H A ymvia, rj virb E @ N yu>via).
I think the probable
explanation is that here, as in l i t 2 0 , 2 1 , 2 6 and 2 7 , Euclid deliberately took
no cognisance of the case in which the multiples of the angles in question
would be greater than two right angles. I f his attention had been called to
the fact that III. 2 0 takes no account of the case where the segment is less
than a semicircle, so that the angle in the segment is obtuse, and therefore the
" angle at the centre " in that case (if the term were still applicable) would be


