
has commended itself to many writers as giving a better definition. Thus, if
we conceive a straight line in space and a point outside it placed so that, in
Plato's words, the line " covers " the point as we look at them, the line will
also " c o v e r " every straight line which passes through the given point and
some one point on the given straight line. Hence, if a straight line passing
always through a fixed point moves in such a way as to pass successively
through every point of a given straight line which does not contain the given
point, the moving straight line describes a surface which satisfies the Euclidean
definition of a plane as I have interpreted it. But if we adopt the definition
of a plane as the surface described by a straight line which, passing through a
given point, turns about it in such a way as always to intersect a given straight
line not passing through the given point, this definition, though it would help us
to prove EucL-xi. 2, does not give us the fundamental properties of a plane;
some postulate is necessary in addition. T h e same is true even if we take a
definition which gives more than is required to determine a plane, the defini­
tion known as Simson's, though it is at least as early as the time of Theon of
Smyrna, who says (p. 112, 5) that a plane is a surface such that, if a straight line
meet it in two points, the straight line lies wholly in it (oKrj ai™ «<£ap/i.o£cTai).
This is also called the axiom of the plane. (For some attempts to prove this on
the basis of other definitions of a plane see my note on the definition of a. plane
surface, 1. Def. 7.) If this definition or axiom be assumed, Prop. 1 becomes
evident, for, as Legendre says, " In accordance with the definition of the plane,
when a straight line has two points common with a plane, it lies wholly in the
plane."
Euclid practically assumes the axiom when he says in this proposition
"there will be in the plane of reference some straight line continuous with
AB."
Clavius tries, unsuccessfully, to deduce this from Euclid's own
definition of a plane; and he seems to admit his
failure, because he proceeds to try another tack, Q
Draw, he says, in the plane DE, the straight line
CG at right angles to A C, and, again in the plane
DE, CF at right angles to CG [1. 1 1 ] . T h e n AC,
CF make right angles with CG in the same plane;
therefore (1. 14) ACF is a straight line. But this
does not really help, because Euclid assumes tacitly,
in Book 1. as well as Book XI., that a straight line joining two points in a
plane lies wholly in that plane.
A curious point in Euclid's proof is the reason given why two straight lines
cannot have a common segment. T h e argument is precisely that of the
" p r o o f " of the same thing given by Proclus on 1. 1 (see note on Book 1.
Post. 2, Vol. 1. p. 197) and is of course inconclusive. T h e fact that two
straight lines cannot have a common segment must be taken to be involved
in the definition of, and the postulates relating to, the straight line; and the
"proof" given here can hardly, I should say, be Euclid's, though the interpo­
lation, if it be such, must have been made very early.
The proof assumes too that a circle can be described so as to cut BA, BC
and BD, or, in other words, it assumes that AD, BC are in one plane;-that
is, Prop. 1 as we have it really assumes the result of Prop. 2. There is there­
fore ground for Simson's alteration of the proof (after the point where BD has
been taken in the given plane in a straight line with AB) to the following:
" Let any plane pass through the straight line AD and be turned about it
until it pass through the point C.


