282

BOOK XI

But the plane through BD,
therefore AB

BE

is the plane of reference ;

is at right angles to the plane of reference.

T h u s AB will also make right angles with all the straight
lines which meet it and are in the plane of reference.
[xi. Def. 3]

But BE which is in the plane of reference meets it;
therefore the angle ABE"is

right.

But, by hypothesis, the angle ABC
therefore the angle ABE

is also right;

is equal to the angle

ABC.

And they are in one plane :
which is impossible.
Therefore the straight line BC
plane ;

is not in a more elevated

therefore the three straight lines BC, BD, BE are in one
plane.
Therefore, if a straight line be set up at right angles to
three straight lines, at their point of meeting, the three straight
lines are in one plane.
Q . E. D.
It follows that, / / a right angle be turned about one of the straight lines
containing it the other will describe a plane.
A t any point in a straight line it is possible to draw only one plane which
is at right angles to the straight line.
One such plane can be found by taking any two planes through the given
straight line, drawing perpendiculars to the straight
line in the respective planes, e.g. BO, CO in the
A
planes A OB, AOC, each perpendicular to AO,
and then drawing a plane (BOC) through the
perpendiculars.
If there were another plane through O per/^^O
pendicular to A O, it must meet the plane through
AO and some perpendicular to it as OC in a
straight line OC different from OC.
Then, by x i . 4 , AOC is a right angle, and in
the same plane with the right angle AOC: which is impossible.
Next, one plane and only one can be drawn through a point outside a straight
line at right angles to that line.
Let P be the given point, AB the given straight
line.
In the plane through P and AB, draw PO per­
pendicular to AB, and through O draw another straight
line OQ at right angles to AB.
T h e n the plane through OP, OQ is perpendicular
to AB.
If there were another plane through P perpendicular
to AB, either

