Let it make it, as EF;
therefore the two straight lines EGF,
area :

EF

will enclose an

which is impossible.
Therefore the straight line joined from E to F is not in a
plane more elevated ;
therefore the straight line joined from E to F is in the plane
through the parallel straight lines AB,
CD.
Therefore etc.
n
w
.

»I .. D.
n
1

It is true that this proposition, in the form in which Euclid enunciates it,
is hardly necessary if the plane is defined as a surface such that, if any two
points be taken in it, the straight line joining them lies wholly in the surface.
But Euclid did not give this definition; and, moreover, Prop. 2 would be
usefully supplemented by a proposition which should prove that two parallel
straight lines determine a plane (i.e. one plane and one only) which also
contains all the straight lines which join a point on one of the parallels to a point
on the other. That there cannot be two planes through a pair of parallels
would be proved in the same way as we prove that two or three intersecting
straight lines cannot be in two different planes, inasmuch as each transversal
lying in one of the two supposed planes through the parallels would lie wholly
in the other also, so that the two supposed planes must coincide throughout
(cf. note on Prop. 2 above).
But, whatever be' the value of the proposition as it is, Simson seems to
have spoilt it completely. H e leaves out the construction of a plane through
EGF, which, as Euclid says, must cut the plane containing the parallels in
a straight line; and, instead, he says, " I n the plane ABCD in which the
parallels are draw the straight line EHF from E to F." Now, although we
can easily draw a straight line from E to F, to claim that we can draw it in
the plane in which the parallels are is surely to assume the very result which is
to be proved. A l l that we could properly say is that the straight line joining
E to F is in some plane which contains the parallels; we do not know that
there is no more than one such plane, or that the parallels determine a plane
uniquely, without some such argument as that which Euclid gives.
Nor can I subscribe to the remarks in Simson's note on the proposition.
H e says ( 1 ) " T h i s proposition has been put into this book by some unskilful
editor, as is evident from this, that straight lines which are drawn from one
point to another in a plane are, in the preceding books, supposed to be in that
p l a n e ; and if they were not, some demonstrations in which one straight line
is supposed to meet another would not be conclusive. For instance, in
Prop. 30, Book 1, the straight line GK would not meet EF, if GK were not in
the plane in which are the parallels AB, CD, and in which, by hypothesis, the
straight line EF is." But the subject-matter of Book 1. and Book x i . is quite
different; in Book 1. everything is in one plane, and when Euclid, in defining
parallels, says they are straight lines in the same plane etc., he only does so
because he must, in order to exclude non-intersecting straight lines which are
not parallel. Thus in 1. 30 there is nothing wrong in assuming that there may
be three parallels in one plane, and that the straight line GHK cuts all three.

