BOOK XI

[xi. 15

But planes to which the same straight line is at right
angles are parallel;
[xi. 14]
therefore the plane through AB,
through DE,
EE.

BC

is parallel to the plane

Therefore, if two straight lines meeting one another be
parallel to two straight lines meeting one another, not in the
same plane, the planes through them are parallel.
Q. E. D.


This result is arrived at in the American text-books already quoted by
starting from the relation between a plane and a straight line parallel to it.
T h e series of propositions is worth giving. A straight line and a plane being
parallel if they do not meet however far they may be produced, we have the
following propositions.
1. Any plane containing one, and only one, of two parallel straight lines is
parallel to the other.
For suppose AS, CD to be parallel and CD to lie in the plane MN.
Then AB, CD determine a plane intersecting MN in the straight line CD
Thus, if AB meets MN, it must meet
it at some point in CD.
But this is impossible, since AB is
parallel to CD.
Therefore AB will not meet the plane
MN, and is therefore parallel to it.
[This proposition and the proof are in
Legendre.]
T h e following theorems follow as corollaries.
2. Through a given straight line a plane can be drawn parallel to any other
given straight line; and, if the lines are not parallel, only one such plane can be
drawn.
W e have simply to draw through any point on the first line a straight line
parallel to the second line and then pass a plane through these two intersecting
lines. This plane is then, by the above proposition, parallel to the second
given straight line.
3. Through a given point a plane can be drawn parallel to any two straight
lines in space; and, if the latter are not parallel, only one such plane can be
drawn.
Here we draw through the point straight lines parallel respectively to the
given straight lines and then draw a plane through the lines so drawn.
Next we have the partial converse of the first proposition above.
4. If a straight line is parallel to a plane, it is also parallel to the inter­
section of any plane through it with the given plane.
Let AB b e parallel to the plane MN, and let
any plane through AB intersect MN'm CD.
Now AB and CD cannot meet, because, if
they did, AB would meet the plane MN.
A n d AB, CD are in one plane.
Therefore AB, CD are parallel.
From this follows as a corollary:


