xi.

i ]
5

P R O P O S I T I O N 15

299

5. If each of two intersecting straight lines is parallel to a given plane,
the plane containing them is parallel to the given
plane.
Let AB, AC be parallel to the plane
MN.
Then, if the plane ABC were to meet the
plane MN, the intersection would be parallel
both to AB and to AC: which is impossible.
Lastly, we have Euclid's proposition.
6. If two straight lines forming an angle are respectively parallel to livo
other straight lines forming an angle, the plane of
the first angle is parallel to the plane of the second.
Let ABC, DEF be the angles formed by
straight lines parallel to one another respectively.
Then, since AB is parallel to DE,
the plane of DEF is parallel to AB [(1) above].
Similarly the plane of DEF is parallel to
BC.
Hence the plane of DEF is parallel to the
plane of ABC [(5)].
Legendre arrives at the result by yet another method. H e first proves
Eucl. x i . 16 to the effect that, if two parallel planes are cut by a third, the lines
of intersection are parallel, and then deduces from this that, if two parallel
straight lines are terminated by two parallel planes, the straight lines are equal
in length.
(The latter inference is obvious because the plane through the parallels
cuts the parallel planes in parallel lines; which
therefore, with the given parallel lines, form a
parallelogram.)
Legendre is now in a position to prove
Euclid's proposition Xi. 1 5 .
If ABC, DEF be the angles, make AB
equal to DE, and BC equal to EF, and join
CA, FD, BE, CF, AD.
Then, as in Eucl. x i . 10, the triangles
ABC, DEF axe equal in all respects;
and AD, BE, CFaxe all equal.
It is now proved that the planes are
parallel by reductio ad absurdum from the
last preceding result. For, if the plane ABC
is not parallel to the plane DEF, let the plane drawn through B parallel to the
plane DEF meet CF, AD in H, G respectively.
Then, by the last result BE, HF, GD will all be equal.
But BE, CF, AD are all equal .which is impossible.
Therefore etc.

