AB is also at right angles to all the straight lines which meet
it and are in the plane of reference;
[xi. Def. 3]
so that it is also at right angles to CE;
therefore the angle ABE is right.
But the angle GFB is also right ;
therefore AB is parallel to EG.
[1. 28]
But AB is at right angles to the plane of reference;
therefore EG is also at right angles to the plane of reference.
[xi-8]

Now a plane is at right angles to a plane, when the
straight lines drawn, in one of the planes, at right angles to
the common section of the planes are at right angles to the
remaining plane.
[xi. Def. 4]
And EG, drawn in one of the planes DE at right angles
to CE, the common section of the planes, was proved to be
at right angles to the plane of reference ;
therefore the plane DE is at right angles to the plane of
reference.
Similarly also it can be proved that all the planes through
AB are at right angles to the plane of reference.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.


Starting as Euclid does from the definition of perpendicular planes as
planes such that all straight lines drawn in one of the planes at right angles to
the common section are at right angles to the other plane, it is necessary for
him to show that, if F be any point in CE, and FG be drawn in the plane
DE at right angles to CE, FG will be perpendicular to the plane to which
A Bis perpendicular.
It is perhaps more scientific to make the definition, as Legendre makes it,
a particular case of the definition of the inclination of planes.
Perpendicular
planes would thus be planes such that the angle which (when it is acute)
Euclid calls the inclination of a plane to a plane is a right angle. When to this
is added the fact incidentally proved in XI. 10 that the " inclination of a plane to
a plane " is the same at whatever point in their common section it is drawn, it
is sufficient to prove the perpendicularity of two planes if one straight line
drawn, in one of them, perpendicular to their common section is perpendicular
to the other.
If this point of view is taken, Props. 18, 19 are much simplified (cf.
Legendre, H . M. Taylor, Smith and Bryant, Rausenberger, Schultze and
Sevenoak, Holgate). T h e alternative proof is as follows.
Let AB be perpendicular to the plane MN, and CE any plane through
AB, meeting the plane MN in the straight line CD.
In the plane MN draw BFaX right angles to CD.


