XI.

20, 2 l ]

P R O P O S I T I O N S 20, 21

3°9

Simson remarks that the angle BA C may happen to be equal to one of
the other two and writes accordingly " If they [all three angles] are not [equalj,
let BAC be that angle which is not less than either of the other two, and is
greater than one of them DAB."
H e then proves, in the same way as Euclid
does, that the angles DAB, DA C are greater than the angle BA C, adding
finally : " But BA C is not less than either of the angles DAB, DA C; there­
fore BA C, with either of them, is greater than the other."
It would be better, as indicated by Legendre and Rausenberger, to begin
by saying that, " If one of the three angles is either equal to or less than either
of the other two, it is evident that the sum of those two is greater than the
first. It is therefore only necessary to prove, for the case in which one angle is
greater than each of the others, that the sum of the two latter is greater than
the former.
Accordingly let BA C be greater than each of the other angles." We then
proceed as in Euclid.
PROPOSITION 

2 1 .

Any solid angle is contained by plane angles less than four
right angles.
Let the angle at A be a solid angle contained by the plane
angles BAC, CAD,
DAB;
I say that the angles BAC,
CAD,
DAB are less than four right angles.
For let points B, C, D be taken
at random on the straight lines AB,
AC, AD respectively,
and let BC, CD, DB be joined.
Now, since the solid angle at B is contained by the three
plane angles CBA, ABD,
CBD,
any two are greater than the remaining one ;
[xi. 20]
therefore the angles CBA, ABD are greater than the angle

CBD.
For the same reason
the angles BCA, ACD are also greater than the angle BCD,
and the angles CD A, ADB are greater than the angle CDB ;
therefore the six angles CBA, ABD, BCA, ACD, CD A,
ADB are greater than the three angles CBD, BCD, CDB.
But the three angles CBD, BDC, BCD are equal to two
right angles ;
[1. 3 ]
therefore the six angles CBA, ABD, BCA, ACD,
CDA,
ADB are greater than two right angles.
2


