BOOK

XI

[XI.

21

And, since the three angles of each of the triangles ABC,
A CD, ADB are equal to two right angles,
therefore the nine angles of the three triangles, the angles

CBA, ACB, BAC, ACD, CDA, CAD, ADB, DBA,

BAD

are equal to six right angles ;
and of them the six angles ABC, BCA, ACD, CDA,
ADB,
DBA are greater than two right angles ;
therefore the remaining three angles BAC, CAD,
DAB
containing the solid angle are less than four right angles.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.


It will be observed that, although Euclid enunciates this proposition for
any solid angle, he only proves it for the particular case of a trihedral angle.
This is in accordance with his manner of proving one case and leaving the
others to the reader. T h e omission of the convex polyhedral angle here
corresponds to the omission, after I. 32, of the proposition about the interior
angles of a convex polygon given by Proclus and in most books. T h e proof
of the present proposition for any convex polyhedral angle can of course be
arranged so as not to assume the proposition that the interior angles of a
convex polygon together with four right angles are equal to twice as many
right angles as the figure has sides.
Let there be any convex polyhedral angle with V as vertex, and let it be
cut by any plane meeting its faces in, say, the
polygon ABCDE.
T a k e O any point within the polygon, and
in its plane, and join OA, OB, OC, OD, OE.
Then all the angles of the triangles with
vertex O are equal to twice as many right angles
as the polygon has s i d e s ;
[1. 32]
therefore the interior angles of the polygon to­
gether with all the angles round O are equal to
twice as many right angles as the polygon has
sides.
C
Also the sum of the angles of the triangles
VAB, VBC, etc., with vertex F a r e equal to twice as many right angles as the
polygon has sides;
and all the said angles are equal to the sum of (1) the plane angles at V
forming the polyhedral angle and (2) the base angles of the triangles with
vertex V.
This latter sum is therefore equal to the sum of (3) all the angles
round O and (4) all the interior angles of the polygon.
Now, by Euclid's proposition, of the three angles forming the solid angle at
A, the angles VAE, VAB are together greater than the angle EAB.
Similarly, at B, the angles VBA, VBC axe together greater than the angle
ABC.
A n d so on.
Therefore, by addition, the base angles of the triangles with vertex V


