
(2) above] are together greater than the sum of the angles of the polygon
(4) above].
Hence, by way of compensation, the sum of the plane angles at
V[(i)
above] is less than the sum of the angles round O [(3) above].
But the latter sum is equal to four right angles; therefore the plane angles
forming the polyhedral angle are together less than four right angles.
T h e proposition is only true of convex polyhedral angles, i.e. those in
which the plane of any face cannot, if produced, ever cut the solid angle.
There are certain propositions relating to equal (and symmetrical) trihe­
dral angles which are necessary to the consideration of the polyaedra dealt
with by Euclid, all of which (as before remarked) have trihedral angles only.
1. Two trihedral angles are equal if two face angles and the included
dihedral angle of the one are respectively equal to two face angles and the included
dihedral angle of the other, the equal parts being arranged in the same order.
2. Two trihedral angles are equal if tivo dihedral angles and the included
face angle of the one are respectively equal to two dihedral angles and the included
face angle of the other, all equal parts being arranged in the same order.
These propositions are proved immediately by superposition.
3. Two trihedral angles are equal if the three face angles of the one are
respectively equal to the three face angles of the other, and all are arranged in the
same order.
Let V—ABC and V—A'B'C be two trihedral angles such that the angle
A VB is equal to the angle A' V'B', the angle BVC to the angle B' V'C, and
the angle CVA to the angle C'V'A'.

We first prove that corresponding pairs of face angles include equal dihedral
angles.
E.g., the dihedral angle formed by the plane angles CVA, AVB is equal
to that formed by the plane angles C'V'A , A'V'B'.
Take points A, B, C on VA, VB, VC and points A', B', C on V'A',
V'B', V'C, such that VA, VB, VC. V'A', V'B', V'C are all equal.
Join BC, CA, AB, ffC, C'A', A'B'.
Take any point D on A V, and measure A'D' along A' V equal to AD.
From D draw DE in the plane A VB, and DE in the plane CVA,
perpendicular to A V. Then DE, DE will meet AB, A C respectively, the
angles VAB, VAC, the base angles of two isosceles triangles, bein : i?ss than
right angles.
Join EE.
Draw the triangle DEE
in the same way.
s


