312

BOOK

XI

[XI.

21, 22

Now, by means of the hypothesis and construction, it appears that the
triangles VA B, V'A'B' are equal in all respects.
So are the triangles VAC, V'A'C, and the triangles VBC, V'B'C.
Thus BC, CA, AB are respectively equal to B'C, C'A', A'B, and the
triangles ABC, A'B'C are equal in all respects.
Now, in the triangles ADE,
A'DE',
the angles ADE, DAE are equal to the angles A'D'E', DA'E' respectively,
and AD is equal to A'D'.
Therefore the triangles ADE, A'D'E are equal in all respects.
Similarly the triangles ADE, A'DE are equal in all respects.
1

Thus, in the triangles A EE, A'E'F",
EA, AEsxt respectively equal to E'A', A'E',
and the angle EAF is equal to the angle E'A'E (from a b o v e ) ;
therefore the triangles AEE, A'EF" are equal in all respects.
1

Lastly, in the triangles DEF, DEF,
the three sides are respectively
equal to the three sides;
therefore the triangles are equal in all respects.
Therefore the angles EDF, E'D'F' are equal.
But these angles are the measures of the dihedral angles formed by the
planes CVA, AVB and by the planes C'V'A', A'V'B' respectively.
Therefore these dihedral angles are equal.
Similarly for the other two dihedral angles.
Hence the trihedral angles coincide if one is applied to the other;
that is, they are equal.
T o understand what is implied by "taken in the same order" we may
suppose ourselves to be placed at the vertices, and to take the faces in clock­
wise direction, or the reverse, for both angles.
If the face angles and dihedral angles are taken in reverse directions, i.e.
in clockwise direction in one and in counterclockwise direction in the other,
then, if the other conditions in the above three propositions are fulfilled, the
trihedral angles are not equal but symmetrical.
If the faces of a trihedral angle be produced beyond the vertex, they form
another trihedral angle. It is easily seen that these vertical trihedral angles
are symmetrical.

PROPOSITION

22.

If there be three plane angles of which two, taken together
in any manner, are greater than the remaining one, and they
are contained by equal straight lines, it is possible to construct
a triangle out of the straight lines joining the extremities of
the equal straight lines.
Let there be three plane angles ABC,

DEF,

GHK, of

