3i4

BOOK

XI

[XI.

while the angle ABC is equal to the angle KHL,
therefore the angle GHL is greater than the angle

2 2, 23

DEF.

And, since the two sides GH, HL are equal to the two
sides DE, EE,
and the angle GHL is greater than the angle DEE,
therefore the base GL is greater than the base DF.
[1. 24]
But GK, KL are greater than GL.
Therefore GK, KL are much greater than DF.
But KL is equal to AC;
therefore AC, GK are greater than the remaining straight
line DE.
Similarly we can prove that
A C, DE are greater than GK,
and further DE, GK are greater than A C.
Therefore it is possible to construct a triangle out of
straight lines equal to AC, DE, GK.
Q. E. D.


T h e Greek text gives an alternative proof, which is relegated by Heiberg
to the Appendix. Simson selected the alternative proof in preference to that
given a b o v e ; he objected however to words near the beginning, " If not, let
the angles at the points B, E, H be unequal and that at B greater than either
of the angles at E, H," and altered the words so as to take account of the
possibility that the angle at B might be equal to one of the other two.
A s will be seen, Euclid takes no account of the relative magnitude of the
angles except as regards the case when all three are equal. Having proved
that one base is less than the sum of the two others, he says that " similarly
we can prove " the same thing for the other two bases.
If a distinction is to be made according to the relative magnitude of the
three angles, we may say, as in the corresponding place in XI. 21, that, if one
of the three angles is either equal to or less than either of the other two, the
bases subtending those two angles must obviously be together greater than the
base subtending the first. Thus it is only necessary to prove, for the case in
which one angle is greater than either of the others, that the sum of the bases
subtending those others is greater than that subtending the first. This is
practically the course taken in the interpolated alternative proof.
PROPOSITION

23.

To construct a solid angle out of three plane angles two of
which, taken togetfier in any manner, are greater than the
remaining one: thus the three angles must be less than four
right angles.


