XI.

2 ]
3

P R O P O S I T I O N 23

3i9

respectively equal to the bases of the isosceles triangles which have the
given angles as vertical angles and the equal sides all of the same length, then
one of these equal sides, as AB, is greater than the radius LO of the circle
circumscribing the triangle LMN.
Assuming that AB is greater than LO, we have only to draw from O a
perpendicular OR to the plane of the triangle LMN, to make OK of such a
length that the sum of the squares on LO, OR is equal to the square on AB,
and to join RL, RM, RN. (The manner of finding OR such that the square
on it is equal to the difference between the squares on AB and LO is shown
in the Lemma at the end of the text of the proposition. W e have already
had the same construction in the Lemma after x . 13.)
Then clearly RL, RM, RN are equal to AB and to one another [1. 4
and 1. 47].
Therefore the triangles LRM, MRN, NRL have their three sides
respectively equal to those of the triangles ABC, DEE, GHK respectively.
Hence their vertical angles are equal to the three given angles respectively;
and the required solid angle is constructed.
W e return now to the proposition to be proved as a preliminary to the
construction, viz. that, in the figures, AB is greater than LO.
It will be observed that Euclid, as his manner is, proves it for one case
only, that, namely, in which 0, the centre of the circle circumscribing the
triangle LMN, falls within the triangle, leaving the other cases for the reader
to prove. A s usual, however, the two other cases are found in the Greek text,
after the formal conclusion of the proposition, as above, ending with the words
owfp eSti iroiijo-ai. This position for the proofs itself suggests that they are not
Euclid's but are interpolated; and this is rendered certain by the fact that
words distinguishing three cases at the point where the centre O of the
circumscribing circle is found, " It [the centre] will then be either within the
triangle LMN or on one of its sides or without. First let it be within," are
found in the MSS. B and V only and are manifestly interpolated. Nevertheless
the additional two cases must have been inserted very early, as they are found
in all the best MSS.
In order to give a clear view ot the proof of all three cases as given in the
text, we will reproduce all three (Euclid's as well as the others) with abbrevia­
tions to make them catch the eye better.
In all three cases the proof is by reductio ad cbsurdum, and it is proved
first that AB cannot be equal to LO, and secondly that AB cannot be less
than LO.
C a s e I.
Suppose, if possible, that AB = LO.
Then AB, BC ait respectively equal to LO, OM;
and AC = LM (by construction).
Therefore
L ABC = L LOM.
Similarly
L DEF= L MON,
L GHK= L NOL,
Adding, we have
L ABC + L DEF* L GHK= L LOM+ L MON+
= four right angles :
which contradicts the hypothesis.
Therefore
AB*LO.
(1)

L NOL

