But the three planes are equal to the three opposite;
therefore the three solids LQ, KR, AU are equal to one
another.
For the same reason
the three solids ED, DM, MT are also equal to one another.
Therefore, whatever multiple the base LF is of the base
AF, the same multiple also is the solid LUof the solid AU.
For the same reason,
whatever multiple the base NF is of the base FH, the same
multiple also is the solid NU of the solid HU.
And, if the base LF is equal to the base NF, the solid L U
is also equal to the solid NU;
if the base LF exceeds the base NF, the solid LU also
exceeds the solid NU;
and, if one falls short, the other falls short.
Therefore, there being four magnitudes, the two bases
AF, FH, and the two solids A U, UH,
equimultiples have been taken of the base AF and the solid
A U, namely the base LF and the solid L U,
and equimultiples of the base HE and the solid HU, namely
the base A ^ a n d the solid NU,
and it has been proved that, if the base LF exceeds the base
FN, the solid L U also exceeds the solid NU,
if the bases are equal, the solids are equal,
and if the base falls short, the solid falls short.
Therefore, as the base AF is to the base FH, so is the
solid AUto the solid UH.
[v. Def. 5]
Q. E. D.


D.

It is to be observed that, as the word parallelogrammic was used in Book 1.
without any definition of its meaning, so irapaXX^Xeirin-fSos, parallelepipedal, is
here used without explanation. While it means simply "with parallel planes,"
i.e. "faces," the term is appropriated to the particular solid which has six
plane faces parallel two and two. T h e proper translation of o r t p c o v
TTapak\t]\(Tri-!r(Soy
is parallelepipedal solid, not solid parallelepiped, as it is
usually translated. Still less is the solid a parallelepiped, as the word is not
uncommonly written.
T h e opposite faces in each set of parallelepipedal solids in this proposition
are not only equal but equal and similar. Euclid infers that the solids in each
set are equal from Def. 1 0 ; but, as we have seen in the note on Deff. 9, 10,


