for they are contained by planes equal both in multitude and
in magnitude.
[xi. Def. 10]
Hence the whole solid AB is bisected by the plane CDEF.
Q. E. D.


Simson properly observes that it ought to be proved that the diagonals of
two opposite faces are in one plane, before we speak of drawing a plane
through them. Clavius supplied the proof, which is of course simple enough.
Since EF, CD are both parallel to AG or BH, they are parallel to one
another.
Consequently a plane can be drawn through CD, EF and the diagonals
DE, CF are in that plane [xi. 7]. Moreover CD, EF are equal as well as
parallel; so that CF, DE are also equal and parallel.
Simson does not, however, seem to have noticed a more serious difficulty.
T h e two prisms are shown by Euclid to be contained by equal faces—the faces
are in fact equal and similar—and Euclid then infers at once that the prisms
are equal. But they are not equal in the only sense in which we have, at
present, a right to speak of solids being equal, namely in the sense that they
can be applied, the one to the other. They cannot be so applied because the
faces, though equal respectively, are not similarly arranged; consequently the
prisms are symmetrical, and it ought to be proved that they are, though not
equal and similar, equal in content, or equivalent, as Legendre has it.
Legendre addressed himself to proving that the two prisms are equivalent,
and his method has been adopted, though his
name is not mentioned, by Schultze and Sevenoak and by Holgate. Certain preliminary pro­
positions are necessary.
1. The sections of a prism made by parallel
planes cutting all the lateral edges are equal
polygons.
Suppose a prism MN cut by parallel planes
which make sections ABCDE, A'B
CDE.
NoviAB, B C, CD,... are respectively parallel
to A'B', BC, CD,....
[xi. 16]
Therefore the angles ABC, BCD, ... are
equal to the angles A'BC, BCD,...
respec­
tively,
[xi. 10]
Also AB,BC, CD, ... are respectively equal
to A'B, BC, CD", ....
... ,
Thus the polygons ABCDE, A'BC'D'E'
are equilateral and equiangular
to one another.
1

fJ

2. Two prisms are equal when they have a solid angle in each contained by
three faces equal each to each and similarly arranged.
Let the faces ABCDE, AG, AL be equal and similarly placed to the
faces A'B'CDB,
A'G', A'L'.
Since the three plane angles at A, A' are equal respectively and are
similarly placed, the trihedral angle at A is equal to the trihedral angle at A'.
[(3) in note to x i . 21]


