Therefore the solid AE is also equal to the solid CF.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.

It is interesting to observe that, in the figure of this proposition, the bases
are represented as lying " in the plane of the paper," as it were, and the third
dimension as "standing u p " from that plane.
T h e figure is that of the
manuscript P slightly corrected as regards the solid AE.
Nothing could well be more ingenious than the proof of this proposition,
which recalls the brilliant proposition 1. 44 and the proofs of vi. 14 and 23.
A s the proof occupies considerable space in the text, it will no doubt be
well to give a summary.
I. First, suppose that the edges terminating at the angular points of the
bases are perpendicular to the bases.
AB, CD being the bases, Euclid constructs a solid identically equal to
AE (he might simply have moved AE itself), placing it so that RS is the edge
corresponding to HK(RS=
HK because the heights are equal), and the face
RX corresponding to HE is in the plane of CS.
T h e faces CD, R W are in one plane because both are perpendicular to
RS.
Thus DR, WU meet, if produced, in Y say.
Complete the parallelograms YT, DTand the solids YX, FT.
Then
(solid YX) = (solid UX),
because they are on the same base .S'T'and of the same height.
[xi. 29]
Also, CI, YI being parallelepipeds cut by planes RF, RX parallel to pairs
of opposite faces respectively,
(solid CF) : (solid RI)=C3
CD-.EJDT,
[xi. 25]
and
(solid YX) :(solid RI)=CJ
YT-.E3DT.
But [ 1 . 3 5 ]
O YT= CD UT
=CJAB
= £ 7 CD, by hypothesis.
Therefore
(solid CF) = (solid YX)
= (solid
= (solid

UX)
AE).

I I . I f the edges terminating at the base are not perpendicular to it, turn
each solid into an equivalent one on the same base with edges perpendicular
to it (by drawing four perpendiculars from the angular points of the base to
the plane of the opposite face), (xi. 29, 30 prove the equivalence.)
T h e n the equivalent solids are equal, by Part 1.; so that the original solids
are also equal.
Simson observes that Euclid has made no mention of the case in which
the bases of the two solids are equiangular, and he prefixes this case to Part 1.
in the text. This is surely unnecessary, as Part 1. covers it well enough : the
only difference in the figure is that UW would coincide with Yb and dV
with ec.
Simson further remarks that in the demonstration of Part 11. it is not
proved that the new solids constructed in the manner described are parallele­
pipeds. T h e proof is, however, so simple that it scarcely needed insertion


