hence the solid AB has also to KP the ratio triplicate of that
which AE has to EK.
But the solid KP is equal to the solid CD,
and the straight line EK to CE;
therefore the solid AB has also to the solid CD the ratio
triplicate of that which the corresponding side of it, AE, has
to the corresponding side CF.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.

PORISM.
From this it is manifest that, if four straight
lines be < continuously > proportional, as the first is to the
fourth, so will a parallelepipedal solid on the first be to the
similar and similarly described parallelepipedal solid on the
second, inasmuch as the first has to the fourth the ratio
triplicate of that which it has to the second.
T h e proof may be summarised as follows.
T h e three edges AE, GE, HE of the parallelepiped AB which meet at
E, the vertex corresponding to R in the other parallelepiped, are produced,
and lengths EK, EL, EM are marked off equal respectively to the edges CF,
FN, FR of CB.
T h e parallelograms and solids are then completed as shown in the figure.
Euclid first shows that the solid CD and the new solid PK are equal and
similar according to the criterion in x i . Def. 10, viz. that they are contained
by the same number of equal and similar planes. (They are arranged in the
same order, and it would be easy to prove equality by proving the equality of
a pair of solid angles and then applying one solid to the other.)
We have now, by hypothesis,
AE : CF= EG : FN=EH
: FR;
that is,
AE : EK=EG
: EL = EH:
EM.
But
AE : £K = CJ AG :CJGK,
[vi. i ]
EG: EL = 0 GK: CD KL,
EH: EM=LJ HK : CD KM.
Again, by x i . 25 or 32,
O AG:CD GK= (solid AB): (solid EO),
CJ GK: CD KL = (solid EO): (solid QL),
O HK: CJ KM= (solid QL): (solid KP).
Therefore
(solid AB) : (solid EO) = (solid EO): (solid QL) = (solid QL): (solid KP),
or the solid AB is to the solid KP (that is, CD) in the ratio triplicate of that
which the solid AB has to the solid EO, i.e. the ratio triplicate of that which
^ . E has to . E X (or CF).
Heiberg doubts whether the Porism appended
genuine.

to this proposition is


