But the solids DX, B T and the solids DC, BA have the
same heights respectively;
therefore, as the base EH is to the base NQ, so is the height
of the solid DC to the height of the solid AB.
Therefore in the parallelepipedal solids AB, CD the bases
are reciprocally proportional to the heights.
Again, in the parallelepipedal solids AB, CD let the bases
be reciprocally proportional to the heights,
that is, as the base EH is to the base NQ, so let the height
of the solid CD be to the height of the solid AB ;
I say that the solid AB is equal to the solid CD.
For, with the same construction,
since, as the base EH is to the base NQ, so is the height of
the solid CD to the height of the solid AB,
while the base EH is equal to the base EK,
and NQ to OR,
therefore, as the base EK is to the base OR, so is the height
of the solid CD to the height of the solid AB.
But the solids AB, CD and BT, DX have the same
heights respectively;
therefore, as the base EK is to the base OR, so is the height
of the solid DX to the height of the solid BT.
Therefore in the parallelepipedal solids BT, DX the bases
are reciprocally proportional to the heights ;
therefore the solid BT is equal to the solid DX.
[Part i.]
But BT is equal to BA,
for they are on the same base EK and of the same height;
[xi. 29, 30]

and the solid DX is equal to the solid DC.
[id.]
Therefore the solid AB is also equal to the solid CD.
Q. E. D.

In this proposition Euclid makes two assumptions which require notice,
(1) that, if two parallelepipeds are equal, and have equal bases, their heights
are equal, and (2) that, if the bases of two equal parallelepipeds are unequal,
that which has the lesser base has the greater height. In justification of the
former statement Euclid says, according to what Heiberg holds to be the
genuine reading, "for parallelepipedal solids of the same height are to one
another as their bases" [xi. 32]. This apparently struck some very early
editor as not being sufficient, and he added the explanation appearing in
Simson's text, " For if, the bases EH, NQ being equal, the heights AG, CM


