were not equal, neither would the solid AB be equal to CD. But it is by
hypothesis equal. Therefore the height CM is not unequal to the height AG;
therefore it is equal." Then, it being perceived that there ought not to be two
explanations, the genuine one was erased from the inferior MSS. While the
interpolated explanation does not take us very far, the truth of the statement
may be deduced with perhaps greater ease from x i . 31 than from x i . 32
quoted by Euclid. For, assuming one height greater than the other, while the
bases are equal, we have only to cut from the higher solid so much as will
make its height equal to that of the other. Then this part of the higher solid
is equal to the whole of the other solid which is by hypothesis equal to the
higher solid itself. That is, the whole is equal to its part: which is impossible.
T h e genuine text contains no explanation of the second assumption that,
if the base EH be greater than the base NQ, while the solids are equal, the
height C W i s greater than the height AG; for the added words " for, if not,
neither again will the solids AB, CD be equal; but they are equal by
hypothesis " are no doubt interpolated. In this case the truth of the assump­
tion is easily deduced from x i . 32 by reductio ad absurdum. If the height CM
were equal to the height AG, the solid AB would be to the solid CD as the
base EH is to the base NQ, i.e. as a greater to a less, so that the solids would
not be equal, as they are by hypothesis. Again, if the height CM were less
than the height AG, we could increase the height of CD till it was equal to
that of AB, and it would then appear that AB is greater than the heightened
solid and a fortiori greater than CD: which contradicts the hypothesis.
Clavius rather ingeniously puts the first assumption the other way, saying
that, if the heights are equal in the equal parallelepipeds, the bases must be
equal This follows directly from x i . 32, which proves that the parallelepipeds
are to one another as their bases; though Clavius deduces it indirectly from
x i . 3 1 . T h e advantage of Clavius' alternative is that it makes the second
assumption unnecessary. H e merely says, if the heights be not equal, let CM
be the greater, and then proceeds with Euclid's construction.
It is also to be observed that, when Euclid comes to the corresponding
proposition for cones and cylinders [XH. 15], he begins by supposing the
heights equal, inferring by XII. 11 (corresponding to x i . 32) that, the solids
being equal, the bases are also equal, and then proceeds to the case where the
heights are unequal without making any preliminary inference about the
bases. T h e analogy then of XII. 15, and the fact that he quotes xi. 32 here
(which directly proves that, if the solids are equal, and also their heights, their
bases are also equal), make Clavius' form the more convenient to adopt.
T h e two assumptions being proved as above, the proposition can be put
shortly as follows.
I. Suppose the edges terminating at the corners of the base to be per­
pendicular to it.
T h e n (a), if the base EH be equal to the base NQ, the parallelepipeds
being also equal, the heights must be equal (converse of xi. 31), so that the
bases are reciprocally proportional to the heights, the ratio of the bases and
the ratio of the heights being both ratios of equality.
(b) If the base EH be greater than the base NQ, and consequently (by
deduction from x i . 32) the height CM greater than the height AG, cut off
C y f r o m C o e q u a l to AG, and draw the plane TV through 7'parallel to the
base NQ, malting the parallelepiped CV, with CT(= AG) for its height.
Then, since the solids AB, CD are equal,
(solid AB):

(solid CV) = (solid CD): (solid CV).

[v. 7]

