II.

If the solids are proportional, take ST such that
AB : CD = EF: ST,
and on ST describe the parallelepiped S V similar and similarly situated to
either of the parallelepipeds EM, GN.
Then, by the first part,
(solid AK): (solid CL) = (solid EM): (solid SV),
whence it follows that
(solid GN) = (solid SV).
But these solids are similar and similarly situated;
therefore their faces are similar and equal;
[xi. Def. 10]
therefore the corresponding sides GH, ST sue equal.
[For this inference cf. note on vi. 22. T h e equality of GH, ST may
readily be proved by application of the two parallelepipeds to one another,
since, being similar, they are equiangular.]
Hence
AB:CD
= EE: GH.
T h e text of the MSS. has here a proposition which is as badly placed as it
is unnecessary. If a plane be at right angles to a plane, and from any one of the
points in one of the planes a perpendicular be drawn to the other plane, the
perpendicular so drawn will fall on the. common section of the planes. It is of
the nature of a lemma to X U . 17, where
alone the fact is made use of.
Heiberg
observes that it is omitted in b and that the
copyist of P knew other texts which did not
contain it. From these facts it is fairly conG ^ A p
~~—^
eluded that the proposition was interpolated.
B
T h e truth of it is of course immediately
obvious by reductio ad absurdum. Let the plane CAD be perpendicular to
the plane AB, and let a perpendicular be drawn to the latter from any point
E in the former.
If it does not fall on AD, the common section, let it meet the plane AB
in F.
Draw FG in AB perpendicular to AD, and join EG.
Then FG is perpendicular to the plane CAD [ x i . Def. 4], and therefore
to GE [xi. Def. 3]. Therefore L EGF is right
Also, since EF is perpendicular to AB,
the angle EFG is right.
That is, the triangle EGF has, two right angles :
which is impossible.
A

PROPOSITION

38.

If Ike sides of the opposite planes of a cube be bisected, and
planes be carried through the points of section, the common
section of the planes and the diameter of the cube bisect one
another.
For let the sides of the opposite planes CF, AH of the
cube AF be bisected at the points K, L,.M, N, O, Q, P, R,

