And the straight lines DE, BG join their extremities ;
therefore DE is parallel to BG.
[1. 33]
Therefore the angle EDT'is equal to the angle BGT,
for they are alternate ;
[1. 29]
and the angle DTU is equal to the angle GTS.
[1. 15]
Therefore DTU, GTS are two t iangles which have two
angles equal to two angles, and one side equal to one side,
namely that subtending one of the equal angles, that is, D U
equal to GS,
for they are the halves of DE, BG ;
therefore they will also have the remaining sides equal to the
remaining sides.
[1. 26]
Therefore DT is equal to TG, and UT to TS.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.


D.

Euclid enunciates this proposition of a cube only, though it is true of any
parallelepiped, no doubt because its truth for a cube is all that was wanted for
the only proposition where it is needed, viz. x m . 17.
Simson remarks that it should be proved that the straight lines bisecting
the corresponding opposite sides of opposite planes are in one plane. This is,
however, clear because e.g. since DK, CL are equal and parallel, KL is equal
and parallel to C D . And, since KL, AB are both parallel to DC, KL is
parallel to AB.
And lastly, since KL, MNaxz both parallel to AB, KL is
parallel to MNand. therefore in one plane with it.
T h e essential thing to be proved is that the plane passing through the
opposite edges DB, EG passes through the straight line US, since, only if
this be the case, can US, D G intersect one another.
T o prove this we have only to prove that, if DU, UE and BS, SG be
joined, DUE and BSG are both straight lines.
Now, since D O is parallel to EE,
LDOU=LEPU.

Thus, in the A s DUO, EUP, two sides D O , OU are equal to two sides
EP, PU, and the included angles are equal.
Therefore
A DUO = A EUP,
DU=
and

UDUO

UE,
=

LEUP,

so that DUE is a straight line, bisected at U. Similarly BSG is a straight
line, bisected at 5.
Thus the plane through DB, EG (DB, EG being equal and parallel)
contains the straight lines DUE, BSG (which are therefore equal and parallel
also) and also [xi. 7] the straight lines US, D G (which accordingly intersect).
In A s DTU, GTS, the angles UDT, SGTsue.
equal (being alternate),
and the angles UTD, STG are also equal (being vertically opposite), while
DU (half of DE) is equal to GS (half of BG).


