CHAPTER
THE

V.
1

TEXT .

IT is well known that the title of Simson's edition of Euclid (first
brought out in "Latin and English in 1756) claims that, in it, "the
errors by which Theon, or others, have long ago vitiated these books
are corrected, and some of Euclid's demonstrations are restored " ; and
readers of Simson's notes are familiar with the phrases used, where
anything in the text does not seem to him satisfactory, to the effect
that the demonstration has been spoiled, or things have been interpo­
lated or omitted, by Theon " o r some other unskilful editor." Now
most of the MSS. of the Greek text prove by their titles that they
proceed from the recension of the Elements by T h e o n ; they purport
to be either " from the edition of Theon " («'« 7-179 ©eWo? eV6oo-eo>s) or
" from the lectures of Theon " (diro avvovo-imv TOV @eWo?). This was
Theon of Alexandria (4th c. A.D.) who also wrote a commentary on
Ptolemy, in which there occurs a passage of the greatest importance
in this c o n n e x i o n : " B u t that sectors in equal circles are to one
another as the angles on which they stand has been proved by me in
my edition of the Elements at the end of the sixth book!' Thus Theon
himself says that he edited the Elements and also that the second part
of VI. 33, found in nearly all the MSS., is his addition.
This passage is the key to the whole question of Theon's changes
in the text of Euclid ; for, when Peyrard found in the Vatican the
MS. 190 which contained neither the words from the titles of the other
MSS. quoted above nor the interpolated second part of VI. 33, he was
justified in concluding, as he did, that in the Vatican MS. we have an
edition more ancient than Theon's. It is also clear that the copyist
of P, or rather of its archetype, had before him the two recensions and
systematically gave the preference to the earlier one; for at XIII. 6 in
P the first hand has added a note in the margin: " This theorem is
not given in most copies of the new edition, but is found in those of
the old." Thus we are more fortunate than Simson, since our
judgment of Theon's recension can be formed on the basis, not of
mere conjecture, but of the documentary evidence afforded by a
comparison of the Vatican MS. just mentioned with what we may
conveniently call, after Heiberg, the Theonine MSS.
2

1

The material for the whole of this chapter is taken from Heiberg's edition of the
Elements,
introduction to vol. v., and from the same scholar's Litterargeschichtliche
Studien
iiber

Eitklid,
2

p.

i 7 4 s q q . and

Paralipomena

1. p. 101 ed. Halma = p. 50 ed. Basel.

zu Euklid

in Hermes,

xxxvm.,

1903.

