The MSS. used for Heiberg's edition of the Elements are the
following:
(1) P = Vatican MS. numbered 190, 4*0, in two volumes (doubt­
less one originally); 10th c.
This is the MS. which Peyrard was able to use; it was sent from
Rome to Paris for his use and bears the stamp of the Paris Imperial
Library on the last page. I t is well and carefully written. There are
corrections some of which are by the original hand, but generally in
paler ink, others, still pretty old, by several different hands, or by one
hand with different ink in different places (P m. 2), and others again
by the latest hand (P ni. ret). It contains, first, the Elements I . — X I I I .
with scholia, then Marinus' commentary on the Data (without the
name of the author), followed by the Data itself and scholia, then the
Elements XIV., XV. (so called), and lastly three books and a part of a
fourth of a commentary by Theon et« TOI)? irpo)(elpov<; icavbvas IlToXepaiov.
The other MSS. are " Theonine."
(2) F = MS. x x v i n , 3, in the Laurentian Library at Florence, 4to;
10th c.
This MS. is written in a beautiful and scholarly hand and contains
the Elements I.—XV., the Optics and the Phaenomena, but is not well
preserved. Not only is the original writing renewed in many places,
where it had become faint, by a later hand of the 16th c , but the same
hand has filled certain smaller lacunae by gumming on to torn
pages new pieces of parchment, and has replaced bodily certain
portions of the MS., which had doubtless become illegible, by fresh
leaves. The larger gaps so made good extend from Eucl. vii. 12 to
IX. 15, and from XII. 3 to the end ; so that, besides the conclusion of the
Elements, the Optics and Phaenomena are also in the later hand, and we
cannot even tell what in addition to the Elements I . — X I I I . the original
MS. contained. Heiberg denotes the later hand by <p and observes
that, while in restoring words which had become faint and filling up
minor lacunae the writer used no other MS., yet in the two larger
restorations he used the Laurentian MS. X X V I I I , 6, belonging to the
13th—14th c. The latter MS. (which Heiberg denotes by f ) was
copied from the Viennese MS. (V) to be described below.
(3) B = Bodleian MS., D'Orville X. 1 inf. 2, 30, 4to ; A.D. 888.
This MS. contains the Elements I . — X V . with many scholia. Leaves
15—118 contain I. 14 (from about the middle of the proposition) to
the end of Book VI., and leaves 123—387 (wrongly numbered 397)
Books V I I . — X V . in one and the same elegant hand (9th a). T h e
leaves preceding leaf 15 seem to have been lost at some time, leaves
6 to 14 (containing Elem. I. to the place in I. 14 above referred to)
being carelessly written by a later hand on thick and common parch­
ment (13th a ) . On leaves 2 to 4 and 122 are certain notes in the
hand of Arethas, who also wrote a two-line epigram on leaf 5, the
greater part of the scholia in uncial letters, a few notes and corrections,
and two sentences on the last leaf, the first of which states that the
MS. was written by one Stephen clericus in the year of the world 6397

