Heiberg sums up his conclusions thus. T h e copyist of V first
copied leaves I to 183 from an original in which two quaterniones
were missing (covering from the middle of Eucl. X. 105 to near the
end of XI. 31). Noticing the lacuna he put aside one quaternio of the
parchment used up to that point. Then he copied onwards from
the end of the lacuna in the original to the end of the Phaenomena.
After this he looked about him for another MS. from which to fill up
the lacuna; finding one, he copied from it as far as the middle of leaf
189 (recto). Then, noticing that the MS. from which he was copying
was of a different class, he had recourse to yet another MS. from which
he copied up to leaf 202. A t the same time, finding that the lacuna
was longer than he had reckoned for, he had to use twelve more
leaves of a different parchment in addition to the quaternio which he
had put aside. The whole MS. at first formed two volumes (the first
containing leaves 1 to 183 and the second leaves 184 to 282); then,
after the last leaf had perished, the two volumes were made into one
to which two more quaterniones were also added. A few leaves of the
latter of these two have since perished.
(5) b = MS. numbered 18—19 in the Communal Library at
Bologna, in two volumes, 4 t o ; n t h c.
This MS. has scholia in the margin written both by the first hand
and by two or three later hands ; some are written by the latest hand,
Theodorus Cabasilas (a descendant apparently of Nicolaus Cabasilas,
14th c.) who owned the MS. at one time. It contains (a) in 14 quater­
niones the definitions and the enunciations (without proofs) of the
Elements I.—XIII. and of the Data, (b) in the remainder o f the
volumes the Proem to Geometry (published among the Variae
Collectiones in Hultsch's edition of Heron, pp. 252, 24 to 274, 14)
followed by the Elements I . — X I I I . (part of XIII. 18 to the end being
missing), and then by part of the Data (from the last three words of
the enunciation of Prop. 38 to the end of the penultimate clause in
Prop. 87, ed. Menge). From XI. 36 inclusive to the end of XII. this
MS. appears to represent an entirely different recension. Heiberg is
compelled to give this portion of b separately in an appendix. H e
conjectures that it is due to a Byzantine mathematician who thought
Euclid's proofs too long and tiresome and consequently contented
himself with indicating the course followed . A t the same time this
Byzantine must have had an excellent MS. before him, probably of the
ante-Theonine variety of which the Vatican MS. 190 (P) is the sole
representative.
(6) p = Paris MS. 2466, 4to; 12th c.
This manuscript is written in two hands, the finer hand occupying
leaves 1 to 53 (recto), and a more careless hand leaves 53 (verso) to
64, which are of the same parchment as the earlier leaves, and leaves
65 to 239, which are of a thinner and rougher parchment showing
traces of writing of the 8th—9th c. (a Greek version of the Old
Testament). The MS. contains the Elements I . — X I I I . and some scholia
after Books xi., x i i . and XIII.
1

1

Zeitschriftfur

Math.

u. Physik,

XXIX., hist.-litt. Abtheilung, p. 1 3 .

