(7) q = Paris MS. 2344, folio ; 12th c.
It is written by one hand but includes scholia by many hands.
On leaves I to 16 (recto) are scholia with the same title as that found
by Wachsmuth in a Vatican MS. and relied upon by him to prove that
Proclus continued his commentaries beyond Book I . Leaves 17 to
357 contain the Elements I . — x m . (except that there is a lacuna from
the middle of VIII, 25 to the eicdeo-i<s of IX. 14) ; before Books VII. and
X. there are some leaves filled with scholia only, and leaves 358 to 366
contain nothing but scholia.
(8) Heiberg also used a palimpsest in the British Museum (Add.
17211). Five pages are of the 7th—8th c. and are contained (leaves
49—53) in the second volume of the Syrian MS. Brit. Mus. 687 of the
9th c.; half of leaf 50 has perished. The leaves contain various frag­
ments from Book x. enumerated by Heiberg, Vol. III., p. v, and nearly
the whole of x m . 1 4
Since his edition of the Elements was published, Heiberg has
collected further material bearing on the history of the text". Besides
giving the results of further or new examination of MSS., he has
collected the fresh evidence contained in an-Nairizi's commentary,
and particularly in the quotations from Heron's commentary given in
it (often word for word), which enable us in several cases to trace
differences between our text and the text as Heron had it, and to
identify some interpolations which actually found their way into the
text from Heron's commentary itself; and lastly he has dealt with
some valuable fragments of ancient papyri which have recently come
to light, and which are especially important in that the evidence drawn
from them necessitates some modification in the views expressed in
the preface to Vol. v. as to the nature of the changes made in Theon's
recension, and in the principles laid down for differentiating between
Theon's recension and the original text, on the basis of a comparison
between P and the Theonine MSS. alone.
The fragments of ancient papyri referred to are the following.
1. Papyrus Herculanensis No. 1061 .
This fragment quotes Def. 15 of Book I. in Greek, and omits the
words rj xaXelrai rrepupepeia, " which is called the circumference,"
found in all our MSS., and the further addition irpbs TI)V TOV KVKKOV
rrepufrepeiav also found in practically all the MSS. Thus Heiberg's
assumption that both expressions are interpolations is now confirmed
by this oldest of all sources.
1

8

2.

The Oxyrhynchus

Papyri

I. p. 58, No. XXIX. of the 3rd or 4th c.

This fragment contains the enunciation of Eucl. II. 5 (with figure,
apparently without letters, immediately following, and not, as usual in
our MSS., at the end of the proof) and before it the part of a word
Trepie%op,e belonging to II. 4 (with room for -vq> dp6oya>vl<p- Strep eBei
1

[els T]4 rod EI/K\C,3OU orotxeta

TOU^V.

" Heiberg, Paralipomena
8

vpo\aftf3avbfieva 4K T&V llpUXov ffropabijr KOX Kar' 4TI-

Cf. p. 32, note 8, above.
zu Euklid

Described by Heiberg in
Forhandlinger,
1900, p. 1 6 1 .

Oversigt

in Hermes,
over

x x x v u i . , 1903, pp. 4 6 — 7 4 , 1 6 1 — 2 0 1 ,

del kngl.

dansie

Videnskabernes

Selskabs

