Seiljat and a stroke to mark the end), showing that the fragment had
not the Porism which appears in all the Theonine M S S . and (in a later
hand) in P, and thereby confirming Heiberg's assumption that the
Porism was due to Theon.
3. A fragment in Fayum towns and their papyri, p. 96, No. I X . of
2nd or 3rd c.
This contains I . 39 and I. 41 following one another and almost
complete, showing that I. 40 was wanting, whereas it is found in all
the M S S . and is recognised by Proclus. Moreover the text of the
beginning of 1. 39 is better than ours, since it has no double Siopio-/i6$
but omits the first (" I say that they are also in the same parallels ")
and has "and" instead of "for let AD be joined " in the next sentence.
It is clear that I. 40 was interpolated by someone who thought there
ought to be a proposition following I. 39 and related to it as I . 38 is
related to I. 37 and I. 36 to I. 35, although Euclid nowhere uses I . 40,
and therefore was not likely to include it. T h e same interpolator
failed to realise that the words "let AD be joined" were part of the
e*<Wt? or setting-out, and took them for the icaTacricevq or " construc­
tion " which generally follows the Siopicr/wi or " particular statement"
of the conclusion to be proved, and consequently thought it necessary
to insert a
before the words.
The conclusions drawn by Heiberg from a consideration of
particular readings in this papyrus along with those of our M S S . will
be referred to below.
W e now come to the principles which Heiberg followed, when
preparing his edition, in differentiating the original text from the
Theonine recension by means of a comparison of the readings of P
and of the Theonine M S S . T h e rules which he gives are subject to a
certain number of exceptions (mostly in cases where one M s . or the
other shows readings due to copyists' errors), but in general they may
be relied upon to give conclusive results.
The possible alternatives which the comparison of P with the
Theonine M S S . may give in particular passages are as follows:
I. There may be agreement in three different degrees.
(1) P and all the Theonine M S S . may agree.
In this case the reading common to all, even if it is corrupt or
interpolated, is more ancient than Theon, i.e. than the 4th c.
(2) P may agree with some (only) of the Theonine M S S .
In this case Heiberg considered that the latter give the true
reading of Theon's recension, and the other Theonine M S S . have
departed from it.
(3) P and one only of the Theonine M S S may agree.
In this case too Heiberg assumed that the one Theonine M S . which
agrees with P gives the true Theonine reading, and that this rule even
supplies a sort of measure of the quality and faithfulness of the
Theonine M S S . Now none of them agrtes alone v. ith P in preserving
the true reading so often as F. Hence F must be held to havt pre­
served Theon's recension more faithfully than the other Theonine M S S . ;
and it would follow that in those portions where F fails us P must

