carry rather more weight even though it may differ from the Theonine
M S S . B V p q . (Heiberg gives many examples in proof of this, as of his
main rules generally, for which reference must be made to his Prole­
gomena in Vol. V . ) T h e specially close relation of F and P is also
illustrated by passages in which they have the same errors;
the
explanation of these common errors (where not due to accident) is
found by Heiberg in the supposition that they existed, but were not
noticed by Theon, in the original copy in which he made his changes.
Although however F is by far the best of the Theonine M S S . , there
are a considerable number of passages where one of the others (B, V ,
p or q) alone with P gives the genuine reading of Theon's recension.
A s the result of the discovery of the papyrus fragment containing
I. 39, 41, the principles above enunciated under (2) and (3) are found
by Heiberg to require some qualification. For there is in some cases
a remarkable agreement between the papyrus and the Theonine M S S .
(some or all) as against P. This shows that Theon took more trouble
to follow older M S S . , and made fewer arbitrary changes of his own,
than has hitherto been supposed. Next, when the papyrus agrees
with some of the Theonine M S S . against P, it must now be held that
these M S S . (and not, as formerly supposed, those which agree with P)
give the true reading of Theon. If it were otherwise, the agreement
between the papyrus and the Theonine M S S . would be accidental: but
it happens too often for this. It is clear also that there must have
been contamination between the two recensions; otherwise, whence
could the Theonine M S S . which agree with P and not with the papyrus
have got their readings? T h e influence of the P class on the Theonine
F is especially marked.
II. There may be disagreement
between P and all the Theonine
MSS.

T h e following possibilities arise.
(1) T h e Theonine M S S . differ also among themselves.
In this case Heiberg considered that P nearly always has the true
reading, and the Theonine M S S . have suffered interpolation in different
ways after Theon's time.
(2) T h e Theonine M S S . all combine against P.
In this case the explanation was assumed by Heiberg to be one or
other of the following.
(a) T h e common reading is due to an error which cannot be
imputed to Theon (though it may have escaped him when putting
together the archetype of his edition); such error may either have
arisen accidentally in all alike, or (more frequently) may be
referred to a common archetype of all the M S S .
(j8) There may be an accidental error in P ; e.g. something
has dropped out of P in a good many places, generally through
OfioioreKevTov
(7) There may be words interpolated in P.
(8) Lastly, we may have in the Theonine M S S . a change made
by Theon himself.
(The discovery of the ancient papyrus showing readings agreeing

