THE TEXT

5S

with some, or with all, of the Theonine M S S . against P now makes it
necessary to be very cautious in applying these criteria.)
It is of course the last class (8) of changes which we have to
investigate in order to get a proper idea of Theon's recension.
Heiberg first observes, as regards these, that we shall find that
Theon, in editing the Elements, altered hardly anything without some
reason, often inadequate according to our ideas, but still some reason
which seemed to him sufficient. Hence, in cases of very slight differ­
ences where both the Theonine M S S . and P have readings good and
probable in themselves, Heiberg is not prepared to put the differences
down to Theon. In those passages where we cannot see the least
reason why Theon, if he had the reading of P before him, should have
altered it, Heiberg would not at once assume the superiority of P
unless there was such a consistency in the differences as wouW indicate
that they were due not to accident but to design. In the absence of
such indications, he thinks that the ordinary principles of criticism
should be followed and that proper weight should be attached to the
antiquity of the sources. A n d it cannot be denied that the sources of
the Theonine version are the more ancient. For not only is the
British Museum palimpsest (L), which is intimately connected with
the rest of our M S S . , at least two centuries older than P, but the other
Theonine M S S . are so nearly allied that they must be held to have
had a common archetype intermediate between them and the actual
edition of Theon; and, since they themselves are as old as, or older
than P, their archetype must have been much older. Heiberg gives
(pp. xlvi, xlvii) a list of passages where, for this reason, he has
followed the Theonine M S S . in preference to P.
It has been mentioned above that the copyist of P or rather of its
archetype wished to give an ancient recension. Therefore (apart from
clerical errors and interpolations) the first hand in P may be relied
upon as giving a genuine reading even where a correction by the first
hand has been made at the same time.
But in many places the first
hand has made corrections afterwards;
on these occasions he must
have used new sources, e.g. when inserting the scholia to the first
Book which P alone has, and in a number of passages he has made
additions from Theonine M S S .
W e cannot make out any " family tree " for the different Theonine
M S S . Although they all proceeded from a common archetype later
than the edition of Theon itself, they cannot have been copied one
from the other; for, if they har' been, how could it have come about
that in one place or other each of them agrees alone with P in pre­
serving the genuine reading ? Moreover the great variety in their
agreements and disagreements indicates that they have all diverged
to about the same extent from their archetype. A s we have seen that
P contains corrections from the Theonine family, so they show correc­
tions from P or other M S S . of the same family. Thus V has part of
the lacuna in the MS. from which it was copied filled up from a M S .
similar to P, and has corrections apparently derived from the same;
the copyist, however, in correcting V , also used another M S . to which

