he alludes in the additions to I X . 19 and 30 (and also on X. 23 Por.):
"in the book of the Ephesian (this) is not found." Who this Ephesian
of the 12th c. was, we do not know.
W e now come to the alterations made by Theon in his edition of
the Elements.
I shall indicate classes into which these alterations
may be divided but without details (except in cases where they affect
the mathematical
content as distinct from form or language pure and
simple) .
I. Alterations
made by Theon where he found, or thought he found,
mistakes in the original.
1. Real blots in the original which Theon saw and tried to
remove.
(a) Euclid has a porism (corollary) to V I . 19, the enunciation
of which speaks of similar and similarly described figures though the
proposition itself refers only to triangles, and therefore the porism
should have come after V I . 20. Theon substitutes triangle for figure
and proves the more general porism after V I . 20.
(b)
In I X . 19 there is a statement which is obviously incorrect.
Theon saw this and altered the proof by reducing four alternatives to
two, with the result that it fails to correspond to the enunciation even
with Theon's substitution of " if" for " when " in the enunciation.
(c) Theon omits a porism to I X . 11, although it is necessary for
the proof of the succeeding proposition, apparently because, owing to
an error in the text {nark TOV corrected by Heiberg into « r i T O ) , he
could not get out of it the right sense.
(d)
I should also put into this category a case which Heiberg
classifies among those in which Theon merely fancied that he found
mistakes, viz. the porism to V . 7 stating that, if four magnitudes are
proportional, they are proportional inversely. Theon puts this after
v. 4 with a proof, which however has no necessary connexion with
V . 4 but is obvious from the definition of proportion.
(e) I should also put under this head X I . I , where Euclid's argu­
ment to prove that two straight lines cannot have a common segment
is altered.
2. Passages which seemed to Theon to contain blots, and which
he therefore set himself to correct, though more careful consideration
would have shown that Euclid's words are right or at least may be
excused and offer no difficulty to an intelligent reader. Under this
head come:
(a) an alteration in I I I . 24.
(b) a perfectly unnecessary alteration, in V I . 14, of "equiangular
parallelograms " into " parallelograms having one angle equal to one
angle," where Theon followed the false analogy of V I . 15.
(c) an omission of words in V . 26, owing to his having been mis­
led by a wrong figure.
(d) an alteration of the order of X I . Deff. 27, 28.
(e)
the substitution of " parallelepipedal solid " for " cube " in xi.
1

1

Exhaustive details
pp. lii—lxxv).

under

all

the

different

heads

are given b y

Heiberg (Vol.

v.

