38, because Theon observed, correctly enough, that it was true of the
parallelepipedal solid in general as well as of the cube, but failed to
give weight to the fact that Euclid must have given the particular
case of the cube for the simple reason that that was all he wanted for
use

'dtneadai.

in

XIII.

17.

(/)
the substitution of the letter <t> for D, ( V for Z in my figure)
because he saw that the perpendicular from K to B<I> would fall on 4?
itself, so that <&, f l coincide. But, if the substitution is made, it should
be proved that <1>, £1 coincide. Euclid can hardly have failed to notice
the fact, but it may be that he deliberately ignored it as unnecessary
for his purpose, because he did not want to lengthen his proposition
by giving the proof.
II. Emendations
intended to improve the form or diction of Euclid.
Some of these emendations of Theon affect passages of appreciable
length.
Heiberg notes about ten such passages; the longest is
in Eucl. X I I . 4 where a whole page of Heiberg's text is affected and
Theon's version is put in the Appendix. T h e kind of alteration may
be illustrated by that in I X . 15 where Euclid uses successively the
propositions V I I . 24, 25, quoting the enunciation of the former but not
of the latter ; Theon does exactly the reverse. In a few of the cases
here quoted by Heiberg, Theon shortened the original somewhat.
But, as a rule, the emendations affect only a few words in each
sentence. Sometimes they are considerable enough to alter the con­
formation of the sentence, sometimes they afe trifling alterations
"more magistellorum ineptorum" and unworthy of Theon. Generally
speaking, they were prompted by a desire to change anything which
was out of the common in expression or in form, in order to reduce
the language to one and the same standard or norm. Thus Theon
changed the order of words, substituted one word for another where
the latter was used in a sense unusual with Euclid (e.g. iireihrjirep,
" since," for o n in the sense of " because"), or one expression for
another in like circumstances (e.g. where, finding "that which was
enjoined would be done" in a theorem, V I I . 31, and deeming the phrase
more appropriate to a problem, he substituted for it " that which is
sought would be manifest"; probably also and for similar reasons he
made certain variations between the two expressions usual at the end
of propositions owep eSei 8eif<u and oirep eSei woirja-ai, quod erat
demonstrandum
and quod erat faciendum).
Sometimes his alterations
show carelessness in the use of technical terms, as when he uses
(to meet) for ((paTrreo-dai (to touch) although the ancients
carefully distinguished the two words. T h e desire of keeping to a
standard phraseology also led Theon to omit or add words in a
number of cases, and also, sometimes, to change the lettering of
figures.
But Theon seems, in editing the Elements, to have bestowed the
most attention upon
III. Additions designed to supplement or explain
Euclid.
First, he did not hesitate to interpolate whole propositions where
he thought there was room or use for them. W e have already

