mentioned the addition to V I . 33 of the second part relating to sectors,
for which Theon himself takes credit in his commentary on Ptolemy.
Again, he interpolated the proposition commonly known as V i l . 22
(ex aequo in proportioneperturbata
for numbers, corresponding to V. 23),
and perhaps also V I I . 20, a particular case of V I I . 19 as V I . 17 is of V I .
16. H e added a second case to V I . 27, a porism to I t 4, a second
porism to i n . 16, and a lemma after X . 1 2 ; perhaps also the porism
to V . 19 and the first porism to V I . 20. He also inserted alternative
proofs here and there, e.g. in 11. 4 (where the alternative differs little
from the original) and in V I I . 31 ; perhaps also in X . 1, 6, and 9.
Secondly, he sometimes repeats an argument where Euclid had
said " For the same reason," adds specific references to points,
straight lines etc. in the figures in order to exclude the possibility
of mistake arising from Euclid's reference to them in general terms,
or inserts words to make the meaning of Euclid more plain, e.g.
componendo and alternately, where Euclid had left them out. Some­
times he thought to increase b y his additions the mathematical
precision of Euclid's language in enunciations or elsewhere, sometimes
to make smoother and clearer things which Euclid had expressed
with unusual brevity and harshness or carelessness, in reliance on the
intelligence of his readers.
Thirdly, he supplied intermediate steps where Euclid's argument
seemed too rapid and not easy enough to follow. T h e form of these
additions varies; they are sometimes placed as a definite intermediate
step with " therefore " or " so that," sometimes they are additions to
the statement of premisses, sometimes phrases introduced by "since,"
"for" and the like, after the inference.
Lastly, there is a very large class of additions of a word, or one
or two words, for the sake of clearness or consistency.
Heiberg
gives a number of examples of the addition of such nouns as
"triangle," "square," "rectangle," "magnitude," "number," "point,"
"side," "circle," "straight line," "area" and the like, of adjectives
such as " remaining," " right," " whole," " proportional," and of other
parts of speech, even down to words like " is " (4<TTI) which is added
600 times, 8>j, apa, ixiv, yap, tcai and the like.
I V . Omissions by Theon.
Heiberg remarks that, Theon's object having been, as above
shown, to amplify and explain Euclid, we should not naturally have
expected to find him doing much in the contrary process of com­
pression, and it is only owing to the recurrence of a certain sort of
omissions so frequently (especially in the first Books) as to exclude
the hypothesis of their being all due to chance that we are bound to
credit him, with alterations making for greater brevity. We have
seen, it is true, that he made omissions as well as additions for the
purpose of reducing the language to a certain standard form. But
there are also a good number of cases where in the enunciation of
propositions, and in the exposition (the re-statement of them with
reference to the figure), he has left out words because, apparently,
he regarded Euclid's language as being too careful and precise.

