Again, he is apparently responsible for the frequent omission of the
words otrep e&ei Seifai (or irorfcrai), Q . E . D . (or F . ) , at the end of
propositions. This is often the case at the end of porisms, where,
in omitting the words, Theon seems to have deliberately departed
from Euclid's practice. T h e M S . P seems to show clearly that, where
Euclid put a porism at the end of a proposition, he omitted the
Q.E.D. at the end of the proposition but inserted it at the end of the
porism, as if he regarded the latter as being actually a part of the
proposition itself. A s in the Theonine M S S . the Q.E.D. is generally
omitted, the omission would seem to have been due to Theon.
Sometimes in these cases the Q.E.D. is interpolated at the end of the
proposition.
Heiberg summed up the discussion of Theon's edition by the
remark that Theon evidently took no pains to discover and restore
from M S S . the actual words which Euclid had written, but aimed
much more at removing difficulties that might be felt by learners
in studying t h e book. His edition is therefore not to be compared
with the editions of the Alexandrine grammarians, but rather with
the work done by Eutocius in editing Apollonius and with an
interpolated recension of some of the works of Archimedes by a
certain Byzantine, Theon occupying a position midway between these
two editors, being superior to the latter in mathematical knowledge
but behind Eutocius in industry (these views now require to be some­
what modified, as above stated). But however little Theon's object
may be approved by those of us who would rather know the
ipsissinta verba of Euclid, there is no doubt that his work was
approved by his pupils at Alexandria for whom it was written ; and
his edition was almost exclusively used by later Greeks, with the
result that the more ancient text is only preserved to us in one M S .
A s the result of the above investigation, we may feel satisfied
that, where P and the Theonine M S S . agree, they give us (except in a
few accidental instances) Euclid as he was read by the Greeks of
the 4 t h c. But even at that time the text had been passed from
hand to hand through more than six centuries, so that it is certain
that it had already suffered changes, due partly to the fault of
copyists and partly to the interpolations of mathematicians. Some
errors of copyists escaped Theon and were corrected in some M S S .
by later hands. Others appear in all our M S S . and, as they cannot
have arisen accidentally in all, we must put them down to a common
source more ancient than Theon. A somewhat serious instance is
to be found in I I I . 8 ; and the use of cnrrkada) for e<pairTea-0a> in the
sense of " touch" may also be mentioned, the proper distinction
between the words having been ignored as it was by Theon also.
But there are a number of imperfections in the ante-Theonine text
which it would be unsafe to put down to the errors of copyists, those
namely where the good M S S . agree and it is not possible to see any
motive that a copyist could have had for altering a correct reading.
In these cases it is possible that the imperfections are due to a
certain degree of carelessness on the part of Euclid himself; for it

