is not possible " Euclidem ab omni naevo vindicare," to use the
words of Saccheri , and consequently Simson is not right in attributing
to Theon and other editors all the things in Euclid to which mathe­
matical objection can be taken. Thus, when Euclid speaks of " the
ratio compounded of the sides" for " the ratio compounded of the
ratios of the sides," there is no reason for doubting that Euclid himself
is responsible for the more slip-shod expression. Again, in the Books
X I . — X I I I . relating to solid geometry there are blots neither few
nor altogether unimportant which can only be attributed to Euclid
himself ; and there is the less reason for hesitation in so attributing
them because solid geometry was then being treated in a thoroughly
systematic manner for the first time.
Sometimes the conclusion
(ov/ LTrepa<T/j,a) of a proposition does not correspond exactly to the
enunciation, often it is cut short with the words xal ra etffj'i "and the
rest" (especially from Book X . onwards), and very often in Books V I I I . ,
I X . it is omitted. Where all the M S S . agree, there is no ground for
hesitating to attribute the abbreviation or omission to Euclid; though,
of course, where one or more MSS. have the longer form, it must be
retained because this is one of the cases where a copyist has a
temptation to abbreviate.
Where the true reading is preserved in one of the Theonine M S S .
alone, Heiberg attributes the wrong reading to a mistake which arose
before Theon's time, and the right reading of the single M S . to a
successful correction.
We now come to the most important question of the Interpolations
introduced before Theoris time.
I. Alternative proofs or additional cases.
It is not in itself probable that Euclid would have given two
proofs of the same proposition ; and the doubt as to the genuineness
of the alternatives is increased when we consider the character of
some of them and the way in which they are introduced. First of
all, we have those of V I . 20 and X I I . 17 introduced by "we shall prove
this otherwise more readily (Trpoxeiporepov)"
or that of X . go " it is
possible to prove more slwrtly (<rvvTO(id>Tepov)."
Now it is impossible
to suppose that Euclid would have given one proof as that definitely
accepted by him and then added another with the express comment
that the latter has certain advantages over the former. Had he con­
sidered the two proofs and come to this conclusion, he would have
inserted the latter in the received text instead of the former. These
alternative proofs must therefore have been interpolated. T h e same
argument applies to alternatives introduced with the words "or even
thus" (rj /cal OVTCOI), "or even otherwise" (fj xal a A A t o ? ) . Under this
head come the alternatives for the last portions of I I I . 7, 8 ; and
Heiberg also compares the alternatives for parts of I I I . 31 (that the
angle in a semicircle is a right angle) and X I I I . 18, and the alternative
proof of the lemma after X . 32. T h e alternatives to X . 105 and 106,
1

2

J

1

EudicUs ab omni naevo vindicates, Mediolani, T 733.
Cf. especially the assumption, without proof or definition, of the criterion for equal solid
angles, and the incomplete proof of x u . 1 7 .
2

