again, are condemned by the place in which they occur, namely after
an alternative proof to X . 115. T h e above alternatives being all
admitted to be spurious, suspicion must necessarily attach to the few
others which are in themselves unobjectionable. Heiberg instances
the alternative proofs to I I I . 9, I I I . 10, V I . 30, V I . 31 and X I . 22, observing
that it is quite comprehensible that any of these might have occurred
to a teacher or editor and seemed to him, rightly or wrongly, to be
better than the corresponding proofs in Euclid. Curiously enough,
Simson adopted the alternatives to I I I . 9, 10 in preference to the
genuine proofs. Since Heiberg's preface was written, his suspicion
has been amply confirmed as regards I I I . 10 by the commentary of
an-Nairizi (ed. Curtze) which shows not only that this alternative is
Heron's, but also that the substantive proposition I I I . 12 in Euclid
is also Heron's, having been given by him to supplement I I I . 11
which must originally have been enunciated of circles " touching one
another " simply, i.e. so as to include the case of external as well as
internal contact, though the proof covered the case of internal contact
only. "Euclid, in the n t h proposition," says Heron, "supposed two
circles touching one another internally and wrote the proposition on
this case, proving what it was required to prove in it. But I will
show how it is to be-proved if the contact be external^''
This additional
proposition of Heron's is by way of adding another case, which brings
us to that class of interpolation. It was the practice of Euclid and
the ancients to give only one case (generally the most difficult one)
and to leave the others to be investigated by the reader for himself.
One interpolation of a second case ( V I . 27) is due, as we have seen,
to Theon. T h e two extra cases of X I . 23 were manifestly interpolated
before Theon's time, for the preliminary distinction of three cases,
"(the centre) will either be within the triangle LMN, or on one of
the sides, or outside. First let it be within," is a spurious addition
(B and V only). Similarly an unnecessary case is interpolated in
III.

II.

II. Lemmas.
Heiberg has unhesitatingly placed in his Appendix to Vol. I I I .
certain lemmas interpolated either by Theon (on X . 13) or later
writers (on X . 27, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, where V only has the lemmas).
But we are here concerned with the lemmas found in all the M S S . ,
which however are, for different reasons, necessarily suspected. We
will deal with the Book X . lemmas last.
(1) There is an a priori ground of objection to those lemmas
which come after the propositions to which they relate and prove
properties used in those propositions; for, if genuine, they would be a
sign of faulty arrangement such as would not be likely in a systematic
work so carefully ordered as the Elements.
T h e lemma to V I . 22 is
one of this class, and there is the further objection to it that in V I . 28
Euclid makes an assumption which would equally require a lemma
though none is found. T h e lemma after xil. 4 is open to the further
objections that certain altitudes are used but are not drawn in the
1

An-Nairlzl, ed. Curtze, p. i l l .

