figure (which is not in the manner of Euclid), and that a peculiar
expression " parallelepipedal solids described on (dvaypa<f>6p.eva a i r o )
prisms " betrays a hand other than Euclid's. There is an objection on
the score of language to the lemma after XIII. 2. T h e lemmas on
XI. 23, XIII. 13, x m . 18, besides coming after the propositions to
which they relate, are not very necessary in themselves and, as regards
the lemma to XIII. 13, it is to be noticed that the writer of a gloss
in the proposition could not have had it, and the words "as will
be proved afterwards" in the text are rightly suspected owing to
differences between the M S . readings. T h e lemma to XII. 2 also, to
which Simson raised objection, comes after the proposition ; but, if it
is rejected, the words "as was proved before" used in XII. 5 and 18,
and referring to this lemma, must be struck out.
(2) Reasons of substance are fatal to the lemma before X. 60,
which is really assumed in X. 44 and therefore should have appeared
there if anywhere, and to the lemma on X. 20, which tries to prove
what is already stated in X. Def. 4.
W e now come to the remaining lemmas in Book x., eleven in
number, which come before the propositions to which they relate and
remove difficulties in the way of their demonstration. That before
X. 42 introduces a set of propositions with the words " that the said
irrational straight lines are uniquely divided... we will prove after
premising the following lemma," and it is not possible to suppose
that these words are due to an interpolator; nor are there any
objections to the lemmas before X. 14, 17, 22, 33, 54, except perhaps
that they are rather easy. T h e lemma before X. 10 and X. 10 itself
should probably be removed from the Elements;
for X. 10 really uses
the following proposition x . 11, which is moreover numbered 10 by
the first hand in P, and the words in X. 10 referring to the leroma "for
we learnt (how to do this) " betray the interpolator. Heiberg gives
reason also for rejecting the lemmas before X. 19 and 24 with the
words " in any of the aforesaid ways " (omitted in the Theonine M S S . )
in the enunciations of X. 19, 24 and in the exposition of X. 20. Lastly,
the lemmas before X. 29 may be genuine, though there is an addition
to the second of them which is spurious.
Heiberg includes under this heading of interpolated lemmas two
which purport to be substantive propositions, XI. 38 and XIII. 6. These
must be rejected as spurious for reasons which will be found in detail
in my notes on XI. 37 and x m . 6 respectively. T h e latter proposition
is only quoted once (in XIII. 1 7 ) ; probably the words quoting it
(with ypa/ifiTj instead of evdeta) are themselves interpolated, and
Euclid thought the fact stated a sufficiently obvious inference from
XIII. 1.

III.
Porisms (or corollaries).
Most of the porisms in the text are both genuine and necessary;
but some are shown by differences- in the M S S . not to be so, e.g. those
to I. 15 (though Proclus has it), ill. 31 and VI. 20 (Por. 2). Sometimes
parts of porisms are interpolated.
Such are the last few lines in
the porisms to IV. 5, VI. 8 ; the latter addition is proved later by

