means of V I . 4, 8, so that the writer of these proofs could not have had
the addition to vi. 8 Por. before him. Lastly, interpolators have added
a sort of proof to some porisms, as though they were not quite
obvious enough; but to add a demonstration is inconsistent with the
idea of a porism, which, according to Proclus, is a by-product of a
proposition appearing without our seeking it.
IV. Scholia.
Several interpolated scholia betray themselves by their wording,
e.g. those given by Heiberg in the Appendix to Book X. and contain­
ing the words icaXel, eKaXeae ("he calls" or "called"); these scholia were
apparently written as marginal notes before Theon's time, and, being
adopted as such by Theon, found their way into the text in P and
some of the Theonine M S S . T h e same thing no doubt accounts for
the interpolated analyses and syntheses to X I I I . 1—5, as to which see
my note on X I I I . 1.
V . Interpolations in Book X .
First comes the proposition " Let it be proposed to us to show that
in square figures the diameter is incommensurable in length with the
side," which, with a scholium after it, ends the tenth Book. T h e form
of the enunciation is suspicious enough and the proposition, the proof
of which is indicated by Aristotle and perhaps was Pythagorean, is
perfectly unnecessary when X . 9 has preceded. The scholium ends
with remarks about commensurable and incommensurable
solids,
which are of course out of place before the Books on solids. T h e
scholiast on Book X. alludes to this particular scholium as being due
to " Theon and some others." But it is doubtless much more ancient,
and may, as Heiberg conjectures have been the beginning of
Apollonius' more advanced treatise on incommensurables. Not only
is everything in Book X . after X . 115 interpolated, but Heiberg doubts
the genuineness even of X . 1 1 2 — 1 1 5 , on the ground that X . n 1
rounds off the theory of incommensurables as we want it in the Books
on solid geometry, while X . 1 1 2 — 1 1 5 are not really connected with
what precedes, nor wanted for the later Books, but seem to form the
starting-point of a new and more elaborate theory of irrationals.
V I . Other minor interpolations are found of the same character as
those above attributed to Theon. First there are two places ( X I . 35
and X I . 26) where, after "similarly we shail prove " and "for the same
reason," an actual proof is nevertheless given. Clearly the proofs are
interpolated; and there are other similar interpolations.
There
are also interpolations of intermediate steps in proofs, unnecessary
explanations and so on, as to which I need not enter into details.
Lastly, following Heiberg's order, I come to
V I I . Interpolated definitions, axioms etc.
Apart from V I . Def. S (which may have been interpolated by
Theon although it is found written in the margin of P by the first
hand), the definition of a segment of a circle in Book I. is interpolated,
as is clear from the fact that it occurs in a more appropriate place in
Book III. and Proclus omits it. V I . Def. 2 (reciprocal figures) is rightly
condemned by Simson—perhaps it was taken from Heron—and

