Heiberg would reject VII. Def. 10, as to which see my note on that
definition. Lastly the double definition of a solid angle (XI. Def. n )
constitutes a difficulty. T h e use of the word itn(pdveia suggests that
the first definition may have been older than Euclid, and he may have
quoted it from older elements, especially as his own definition which
follows only includes solid angles contained by planes, whereas the
other includes other sorts (cf. the words ypap.fid>v, ypafifiais) which are
also distinguished by Heron (Def. 22). If the first definition had come
last, it could have been rejected without hesitation : but it is not so
easy to reject the first part up to and including " otherwise " (a\\o>?).
N o difficulty need be felt about the definitions of "oblong," "rhombus,"
and " rhomboid," which are not actually used in the Elements;
they
were no doubt taken from earlier elements and given for the sake of
completeness.
A s regards the axioms or, as they are called in the text, common
notions (xoival evvoiai), it is to be observed that Proclus says that
Apollonius tried to prove " the axioms," and he gives Apollonius'
attempt to prove A x i o m I. This shows at all events that Apollonius
had some of the axioms now appearing in the text. But how could
Apollonius have taken a controversial line against Euclid on the
subject of axioms if these axioms had not been Euclid's to his know­
ledge? A n d , if they had been interpolated between Euclid's time
and his own, how could Apollonius, living so comparatively short a
time after Euclid, have been ignorant of the fact ? Therefore some of
the axioms are Euclid's (whether he called them common notions, or
axioms, as is perhaps more likely since Proclus calls them axioms):
and we need not hesitate to accept as genuine the first three discussed
by Proclus, viz. (1) things equal to the same equal to one another,
(2) if equals be added to equals, wholes equal, (3) if equals be
subtracted from equals, remainders equal. T h e other two mentioned
by Proclus (whole greater than part, and congruent figures equal) are
more doubtful, since they are omitted by Heron, Martianus Capella,
and others. T h e axiom that "two lines cannot enclose a space" is
however clearly an interpolation due to the fact that I. 4 appeared to
require it.
T h e others about equals added to unequals, doubles of
the same thing, and halves of the same thing are also interpolated;
they are connected with other interpolations, and Proclus clearly
used some source which did not contain them.
Euclid evidently limited his formal axioms to those, which seemed
to him most essential and of the widest application; for he not unfrequently assumes other things as axiomatic, e.g. in VII. 28 that, if a
number measures two numbers, it measures their difference.
T h e differences of reading appearing in Proclus suggest the
question of the comparative purity of the sources used by Proclus,
Heron and others, and of our text. T h e omission of the definition of
a segment in Book I. and of the old gloss " which is called the cir­
cumference " in I. Def. 15 (also omitted by Heron, Taurus, Sextus
1

1

Proclus, p p . 194, i o s q q .

