BOOK XI

[xi.

Deff.

20.
A n d the base is the circle described by the straight
line which is carried round.
21.
When, one side of those about the right angle in a
rectangular parallelogram remaining fixed, the parallelogram
is carried round and restored again to the same position from
which it began to be moved, the figure so comprehended is a

cylinder.
22.
T h e axis of the cylinder is the straight line which
remains fixed and about which the parallelogram is turned.
23.
A n d the bases are the circles described by the two
sides opposite to one another which are carried round.
24.
Similar cones and cylinders are those in which
the axes and the diameters of the bases are proportional.
25.
A cube
squares.

is a solid figure contained

by six equal

26.
A n octahedron is a solid figure contained by eight
equal and equilateral triangles.
27.
A n icosahedron is a solid figure
twenty equal and equilateral triangles.

contained by

-

28.
A dodecahedron is a solid figure contained by
twelve equal, equilateral, and equiangular pentagons.
D E F I N I T I O N I.
SREPTOV ccjti t o pijKos

kcu 7 r \ a T o s KCU /3d6os ix '
w

This definition was evidently traditional, as may be inferred from a number
of passages in Plato and Aristotle. T h u s Plato speaks (Sophist, 235 d) of
making an imitation of a model (IRAPDAIIYPA) " in length and breadth and
d e p t h " and (Laws, 837 e) of "the art of measuring length, surface and depth"
as one of three PAORJPARA. Depth, the third dimension, is used alone as a
description of " body " by Aristotle, the term being regarded as connoting the
other two dimensions; thus (Metaph. 1020 a 13, 1 1 ) "length is a fine, breadth a
surface, and depth b o d y " ; " that which is continuous in one direction is length,
in two directions breadth, and in three depth." Similarly Plato (Rep. 528 b, d),
when reconsidering his classification of astronomy as next to (plane) geometry:
"although the science dealing with the additional dimension of depth is next in
order, yet, owing to the fact that it is studied absurdly, I passed it over and
put next to geometry astronomy, the motion of (bodies having) depth." In
Aristotle (Topics v i . 5, 142 b 24) we find " t h e definition of body, that which
has three dimensions (8tao-Tacms)"; elsewhere he speaks of it as " that which
has all the dimensions" (De caelo 1. 1, 268 b 6 ) , "that which has dimension
every way " ( t o WAVRG Siacrrao-ii' c^ov, Metaph. 1066 b 32) etc. In the Physics

