In other words, the inclination of a straight line to a plane is the angle
between the straight line and its projection on the plane. This angle is of
course less than the angle between the straight line and any other straight line
in the plane through the intersection of the straight line and plane; and the
fact is sometimes made the subject of a proposition in modern text-books. It
is easily proved by means of the propositions x i . 4, 1. 19 and 18.
DEFINITION

6.

'EiriWSou 7rpos iiriirtoov kXwtis iariv 17 ircpiexo/AcVi/ o£cia ytuvia vtrb rmv Trpos

opda.% ry Koivfj ropy dyopiftov irpbs tuj avrw <njptit^ iv tKaripif rwv inuriotav.
When two planes meet in a straight line, they form what is called in
modern text-books a dihedral angle, which is denned as the opening or angular
opening between the two planes. This dihedral angle is an " angle " altogether
different in kind from a plane angle, as again it is different from a solid angle
as denned by Euclid (i.e. a trihedral, tetrahedral, etc. angle). Adopting for
the moment Apollonius' conception of an angle as the "bringing together of a
surface or solid towards one point under a broken line or surface " (Proclus,
p. 123, 16), we may regard a dihedral angle as the bringing together of the
broken surface formed by two intersecting planes not to a point but to a straight
line, namely the intersection of the planes. Legendre, in a proposition on the
subject, applied provisionally the term corner to describe the dihedral angle
between two planes; and this would be a better word, I think, than opening
to use in the definition.
T h e distinct species of " a n g l e " which we call dihedral is, however,
measured by a certain plane angle, namely that which Euclid describes in the
present definition and calls the inclination of a plane to a plane, and which in
some modern text-books is called the plane angle of the dihedral angle.
It is necessary to show that this plane angle is a proper measure of the
dihedral angle, and accordingly Legendre has a proposition to this effect. In
order to prove it, it is necessary to show that, given two planes meeting in a
straight line,
(1) the plane angle in question is the same at all points of the straight line
forming the common section;
(2) if the dihedral angle between two planes increases or diminishes in a
certain ratio, the plane angle in question will increase or diminish in the same
ratio.
(1) If MAN, MAP be two planes intersecting in MA, and if AN, AP
be drawn in the planes respectively and at right angles to
MA, the angle NAP is the inclination of the plane to the
plane or the plane angle of the dihedral angle.
Let MC, MB be also drawn in the respective planes
at right angles to MA.
T h e n since, in the plane MAN, MC and AN are
drawn at right angles to the same straight line MA,
MC, AN are parallel.
For the same reason, MB, AP are parallel.
A-*.
Therefore [xi. 10] the angle BMC is equal to the
angle PAN.
A n d M may be any point on MA.
Therefore the
plane angle described in the definition is the same at all
points of AM.

