(2) In the plane NAP draw the arc NDP of any circle with centre A,
and draw the radius AD.
Now the planes NAP, CMB, being both at right angles to the straight
line MA, are parallel;
[xi. 14]
therefore the intersections AD, MR of these planes with the plane MAD are
parallel,
[xi. 16]
and consequently the angles BME, PAD are equal.
[xi. 10]
If now the plane angle NAD were equal to the plane angle DAP, the
dihedral angle NAMD would be equal to the dihedral angle DAMP;
for, if the angle PAD were applied to the angle DAN, AM remaining the
same, the corresponding dihedral angles would coincide.
Successive applications of this result show that, if the angles NAD,
DAP
each contain a certain angle a certain number of times, the dihedral angles
NAMD, DAMP will contain the corresponding dihedral angle the same
number of times respectively.
Hence, where the angles NAD, DAP are commensurable, the dihedral
angles' corresponding to them are in the same ratio.
Legendre then extends the proof to the case where the plane angles are
incommensurable by reference to an exactly similar extension in his proposition
corresponding to Euclid vi. 1, for which see the note on that proposition.
Modern text-books make the extension by an appeal to limits.
DEFINITION

7.

'E7ri7reSoi' irp<K iiriirt&ov bpoiw KixXlirOai \tynai k o i erfpov IRPOS irtpov, orav
AT up-qpivai TCW kXiWcuv YBIPIAI ICRAI akktj\cu<; wtriv.
DEFINITION
HapdWrjka C7ri'irc8a CART r a

8.

avvpirrutTa.

Heron has the same definition of parallel planes (Def. 115)- T h e Greek
word which is translated " which do not m e e t " is dcrv/xTrruiTa, the term which
has been adopted for the asymptotes of a curve.
DEFINITION
"0/IOTA CRRCPCA C ^ / i a T a CART ra

9.

vjrb bpoitav iiriiriSoiv

ntpit^opiva

"MTWV

irXrjOos.
DEFINITION

10.

"ICRA 8c Kal bpoia ARCPCA o-yyjpaTa. CART RA viro 6/XOIW C7RORC8<i>i' iripu-^opiva
brwr rip TRAIYFEI Kal ™ ptyidti.

These definitions, the second of which practically only substitutes the
words " equal and similar " for the word " similar" in the first, have been the
mark of much criticism.
Simson holds that the equality of solid figures is a thing which ought to be
proved, by the method of superposition, or otherwise, and hence that Def. 10
is not a definition but a theorem which ought not to have been placed among
the definitions. Secondly, he gives an example to show that the definition or
theorem is not universally true. H e takes a pyramid and then erects on the
base, on opposite sides of it, two equal pyramids smaller than the first. T h e
addition and subtraction of these pyramids respectively from the first give two

to

