solid figures which satisfy the definition but are clearly not equal (the smaller
having a re-entrant angle); whence it also appears that two unequal solid
angles may be contained by the same number of equal plane angles.
Maintaining then that Def. 10 is an interpolation by " a n unskilful hand,"
Simson transfers to a place before Def. 9 the definition of a solid angle, and
then defines similar solid figures as follows:
Similar solid figures are such as have all their solid angles equal, each to each,
and which are contained by the same number of similar planes.
Legendre has an invaluable discussion of the whole subject of these
definitions (Note XII., pp. 323—336, of the 14th edition of his Aliments de
GiomSlrie). H e remarks in the first place that, as Simson said, Def. 10 is not
properly a definition, but a theorem which it is necessary to prove; for it is
not evident that two solids are equal for the sole reason that they have an
equal number of equal faces, and, if true, the fact should be proved by super­
position or otherwise. T h e fault of Def. 10 is also common to Def. 9. For,
if Def. 10 is not proved, one might suppose that there exist two unequal and
dissimilar solids with equal faces; but, in that case, according to Definition 9,
a solid having faces similar to those of the two first would be similar to both
of them, i.e. to two solids of different form: a conclusion implying a con­
tradiction or at least not according with the natural meaning of the word
"similar."
What then is to be said in defence of the two definitions as given by
Euclid ? It is to be observed that the figures which Euclid actually proves
equal or similar by reference to Deff. 9, 10 are such that their solid angles do
not consist of more than three plane angles ; and he proves sufficiently clearly
that, if three plane angles forming one solid angle be respectively equal to
three plane angles forming another solid angle, the two solid angles are equal.
If now two polyhedra have their faces equal respectively, the corresponding
solid angles will be made up of the same number of plane angles, and the
plane angles forming each solid angle in one polyhedron will be respectively
equal to the plane angles forming the corresponding solid angle in the other.
Therefore, if the plane angles in each solid angle are not more than three in
number, the corresponding solid angles will be equal. But if the correspond­
ing faces are equal, and the corresponding solid angles equal, the solids must
be e q u a l ; for they can be superposed, or at least they will be symmetrical
with one another. Hence the statement of Deff. 9, 10 is true and admissible
at all events in the case of figures with trihedral angles, which is the only case
taken by Euclid.
Again, the example given by Simson to prove the incorrectness of Def. 10
introduces a solid with a re-entrant angle. But it is more than probable that
Euclid deliberately intended to exclude such solids and to take cognizance of
convex polyhedra o n l y ; hence Simson's example is not conclusive against the
definition.
Legendre observes that Simson's own definition, though true, has the
disadvantage that it contains a number of superfluous conditions. T o get
over the difficulties, Legendre himself divides the definition of similar solids
into two, the first of which defines similar triangular pyramids only, and the
second (which defines similar polyhedra in general) is based on the first.
Two triangular pyramids are similar when they have pairs of faces respectively
similar, similarly placed and equally inclined to one another.
Then, having formed a triangle with the vertices of three angles taken on
the same face or base of a polyhedron, we may imagine the vertices of the

