different solid angles of the polyhedron situated outside of the plane of this
base to be the vertices of as many triangular pyramids which have the triangle
for common base, and each of these pyramids will determine the position of
one solid angle of the polyhedron. This being so,
Two polyhedra are similar when they have similar bases, and the vertices of
their corresponding solid angles outside the bases are determined by triangular
pyramids similar each to each.
A s a matter of fact, Cauchy proved that two convex solid figures are equal
if they are contained by equal plane figures similarly arranged. Legendre
gives a proof which, he says, is nearly the same as Cauchy's, depending on two
lemmas which lead to the theorem that, Given a convex polyhedron in which all
the solid angles are made up of more than three plane angles, it is impossible to
vary the inclinations of the planes of this solid so as to produce a second polyhe­
dron formed by the same planes arranged in the same manner as in the given
polyhedron. T h e convex polyhedron in which all the solid angles are made up
of more than three plane angles is obtained by cutting off from any given
polyhedron all the triangular pyramids forming trihedral angles (if one and the
same edge is common to two trihedral angles, only one of these angles is
suppressed in the first operation). This is legitimate because trihedral angles
are invariable from their nature.
Hence it would appear that Heron's definition of equal solid figures, which
adds " similarly situated " to Euclid's " similar " is correct, if it be understood to
apply to convex polyhedra only: Equal solid figures are those which are
contained by equal and similarly situated planes, equal in number and magnitude:
where, however, the words " equal and " before " similarly situated " might be
dispensed with.
Heron (Def. 118) defines similar solidfiguresas those which are contained
by planes similar and similarly situated. If understood of convex polyhedra,
there would not appear to be any objection to this, in view of the truth of
Cauchy's proposition about equal solid figures.

DEFINITION

II.

2i"«p€a ywvia IARIV -Q VTTO TRXEIOVWV 17 8vo YPAPPMV ANROPIVFOV aXX-QXIAV «at FIYJ
IV RJJ avTjJ IIRI^AVTUX. OWR&v irpos 7rao-ais rats ypa/xpats kAicis. *A\A<os • VRTPTA.
YWVIA IARLV 17 vwb TRXTIOVWV yj ctvo ya>na>v IIRNRIOBIV N€pie\OP€tnrj prj ovcruJi/ IV t<j>
aurw IIRNRISTA. irpbs IVL (rtjpeup
tTwurrapevfuv.

Heiberg conjectures that the first of these two definitions, which is not in
Euclid's manner, was perhaps taken by him from some earlier Elements.
T h e phraseology of the second definition is exactly that of Plato when he
is speaking of solid angles in the Timaeus (p. 55). T h u s he speaks (1) of four
equilateral triangles so put together (iwia-Tapeva) that each set of three plane
angles makes one solid angle, (2) of eight equilateral triangles put together so
that each set of four plane angles makes one solid angle, and (3) of six squares
making eight solid angles, each composed of three plane right angles.
As we know, Apollonius defined an angle as the " bringing together of a
surface or solid to one point under a broken line or surface." Heron (Def. 22)
even omits the word " broken " and says that A solid angle is in general (KOLVW;)
the bringing together of a surface which has its concavity in one and the same
direction to one point. It is clear from an allusion in Proclus (p. 123, 1—6) to
the half of a cone cut off by a triangle through the axis, and from a scholium to

