this definition, that there was controversy as to the correctness of describing as a
solid angle the " angle " enclosed by fewer than three surfaces (including curved
surfaces). Thus the scholiast says that Euclid's definition of a solid angle as
made up of three or more plane angles is deficient because it does not e.g. cover
the case of the angle of a " fourth part of a sphere," which is contained by more
than two surfaces, though not all plane. B u t he declines to admit that the
half-cone forms a solid angle at the vertex, for in that case the vertex of the
cone would itself be an angle, and a solid angle would then be formed both
by two surfaces and by one surface: " which is not true." Heron on the
other hand (Def. 22) distinctly speaks of solid angles which are not contained
by plane rectilineal angles, " e.g. the angles of cones." T h e conception of the
latter " angles " as the limit of solid angles with an infinite number of infinitely
small constituent plane angles does not appear in the Greek geometers so far
as I know.
In modern text-books a polyhedral angle is usually spoken of as formed
(or bounded) by three or more planes meeting at a point, or it is the angular
opening between such planes at the point where they meet.

DEFINITION

12.

Tlvpa/us fori <r)pjpui crepcc* cVt7rc'8ots TT€pit\6p€vov airb cros <Vi7rc'8ou 7rpos m
onffieua ctwccttuis.
This definition is by no means too clear, nor is the slightly amplified
definition added to it by Heron (Def. 99). A pyramid is thefigurebrought
together to one point, by putting together triangles, from a triangular, quadri­
lateral or polygonal, that is, any rectilineal, base.
A s we might expect, there is great variety in the definitions given in
modern text-books. Legendre says a pyramid is the solid formed when several
triangular planes start from one point and are terminated at the different sides
of one polygonal plane.
Mr H . M . Taylor and Smith and Bryant call it a polyhedron all but one of
whose faces meet in a point.
Mehler reverses Legendre's form and gives the content of Euclid's in
clearer language. "An xx-sidedpyramid is bounded by an n-sided polygon as base
and n triangles which connect its sides with one and the same point outside it."
Rausenberger points out that a pyramid is the figure cut off from a solid
angle formed of any number of plane angles by a plane which intersects the
solid angle.
DEFINITION

13.

Ylpurpa « t t ! <r)(TJpa {rriptbv CTroreSois Tr€pL€\6ptvov, m> ovo rd direrainriov t e a
T€ K a t o/xoid e o n K a t TrapdWrjKa, ra 8c Aonra irapa\\Tj\6ypappa.
M r H . M . Taylor, followed by Smith and Bryant, defines a prism as a
polyhedron all but two of the faces of which are parallel to one straight line.
Mehler calls an «-sided prism a body contained behveen hvo parallel planes
and enclosed by n other planes with parallel lines of intersection.
Heron's definition of a prism is much wider (Def. 105). Prisms are those
figures which are connected (<7wd7rroiTa) from a rectilineal base to a rectilineal
area by rectilineal collocation (KO.T tvOvypappov o-vvdto-iv). B y this Heron must

