apparently mean any convex solid formed by connecting the sides and angles
of two polygons in different planes, and
each having any number of sides, by
straight lines forming triangular faces
(where of course two adjacent triangles
may be in one plane and so form one
quadrilateral face) in the manner shown
in the annexed figure, where
ABCD,
EFG
represent the base and its
opposite.
Heron goes on to explain that, if
the face opposite to the base reduces to
a straight line, and a solid is formed by
connecting the base to its extremities by
straight lines, as in the other case, the
resulting figure is neither a pyramid nor
a prism.
Further, he defines parallelogrammic (in the body of the definition parallelsided) prisms as being those prisms which have six faces and have their
opposite planes parallel.
DEFINITION

14.

2<£<upd itrriv, orav rjpiKvicXlov fityov<rr)$ tijs Sta/itVpou iripievtyOiv
rb
TjfjUKVKkwv cis To airb iri\iv airoKaTatrraOy, 5$£v i/pfaro <j>ip«r8ai, t o Trepi\r)<p8iv
<rxvpa.
The scholiast observes that this definition is not properly a definition ot a
sphere but a description of the mode of generating it. But it will be seen, in
the last propositions of Book x m . , why, Euclid put the definition in this form.
It is because it is this particular view of a sphere which he uses to prove that
the vertices o f the regular solids which he wishes to " c o m p r e h e n d " in certain
spheres do lie on the surfaces of those spheres. H e proves in fact that the
said vertices lie on semicircles described on certain diameters of the spheres. F o r
the real definition the scholiast refers to Theodosius' Sphaerica. But of course
the proper definition was given much earlier. In Aristotle the characteristic
of a sphere is that its extremity is equally distant from its centre (to *o-ov dirc'xtH'
toB pAo-ov to ccrxaTov, De caelo II. 14, 297 a 24). Heron (Def. 76) uses the
same form as that in which Euclid defines the circle: A sphere is a solid
figure bounded by one surface, such that all the straight lines falling on it from
one point of those which lie within the figure are equal to one another. S o the
usual definition in the text-books: A sphere is a closed surface such that all
points of it are equidistant from a fixed point within it.

DEFINITION

15.

"AFUIV 8c tjJs crcpaipas iaTiv r] pivovaa. ddtta, irepl rjv to T}PU.KVK\IOV arpccperat.
That any diameter of a sphere may be called an axis is made clear by
Heron (Def. 78). The diameter of the sphere is called an axis, and is any
straight line drawn through the centre and bounded in both directions by the
sphere, immovable, about which the sphere is moved and turned. Cf. Euclid's
Def. 17.

