BOOK

XI

DEFINITION
KcVrpov 8c rfji oipalpas

iori TO avro,

[xi. DEFF.

16—18

16.

S xal tov

rjpiKVKXiov.

Heron, Def. 77. The middle (point) of the sphere is called its centre; and
this same point is also the centre of the hemisphere.
•

DEFINITION

17.

A i d u c r p o s 8c ttJs cnpatpas co-riv tvdtia TK 81a toC Ktvrpov r}yptvr)
rovpivr)
i<p' ixdrtpa
TO. piprq w r d rrys C7rtrpavctdt Trjs
oipaipat.

DEFINITION

Kal 7rcpa-

18.

Kfuvd? corti', otov opOoyuivtov rpiyiovov ptvovorfi /xias irXcvpas ruiv wtpi TIJV
op6i)v yuiviav irtpitvt)(6iv TO rpiyiovov tit to a v r o TrdXiv diroKaTao-racJg, odtv ijpfaTO
•piptoOai, TO Trtptk-qtp&lv o-)(ijpa.
K&V piv r) pivovoa
tvdtia
lor) ft rg Xoiirp [rg]
irtpl ri)v 6p0i)v rrtpuptpopitrg,
dppoyuivtos fcrTai 6 Kavos, iav hi tXarri&v,
apfikvyaivtos, lav Sc ptL^tuv,
o^vyuji'tos.
T h i s definition, or rather description of the genesis, of a (right) cone is
interesting on account of the second sentence distinguishing between rightangled, obtuse-angled and acute-angled cones. This distinction is quite
unnecessary for Euclid's purpose and is not used by him in Book x n . ; it is no
doubt a relic of the method, still in use in Euclid's time, by which the earlier
Greek geometers produced conic sections, namely, by cutting right cones only
by sections always perpendicular to an edge. With this system the parabola
was a section of a right-angled cone, the hyperbola a section of an obtuse-angled
cone, and the ellipse a section of an acute-angled cone. T h e conic sections were
so called by Archimedes, and generally until Apollonius, who was the first to
give the complete theory of their generation by means of sections not perpen­
dicular to an edge, and from cones which are in general oblique circular cones.
T h u s Apollonius begins his Conies with the more scientific definition of a cone.
If, he says, a straight line infinite in length, and passing always through a fixed
point, be made to move round the circumference of a circle which is not in the
same plane with the point, so as to pass successively through every point of
that circumference, the moving straight line will trace out the surface of a double
cone, or two similar cones lying in opposite directions and meeting in the fixed
point, which is the apex of each cone. T h e circle about which the straight line
moves is called the base of the cone lying between the said circle and the fixed
point, and the axis is defined as the straight line drawn from the fixed point,
or the apex, to the centre of the circle forming the base. Apollonius goes on
to say that the cone is a scalene or oblique cone except in the particular case
where the axis is perpendicular to the base. In this latter case it is a right
cone.
Archimedes called the right cone an isosceles cone. This fact, coupled
with the appearance in his treatise On Conoids and Spheroids (7, 8, 9) of
sections of acute-angled cones (ellipses) as sections of conical surfaces which are
proved to be oblique circular cones by finding their circular sections, makes it
sufficiently clear that Archimedes, if he had defined a cone, would have
defined it in the same way as Apollonius does.

