DEFINITIONS.

i . Similar rectilineal figures are such as have their
angles severally equal and the sides about the equal angles
proportional.
[2.

Reciprocally related figures. See note.']

3. A straight line is said to have been cut in extreme
and mean ratio when, as the whole line is to the greater
segment, so is the greater to the less.
4. T h e height of any figure is the perpendicular drawn
from the vertex to the base.
DEFINITION I.
O/uota c\rjfjLaTa tvOvypafi/xd lariv, oo*a TAS TC yoivtas uras
TAS irfpi TOLS 10-as yoWas irXtvpa.% dvdXoyov.

Kara p.iav Kal

This definition is quoted by Aristotle, Anal. post. 11. 17, 99 a 13, where
he says that similarity (TO op.01.ov) in the case of figures "consists, let us say
(10-u)?), in their having their sides proportional and their angles equal." The
use of the word To-ios may suggest that, in Aristotle's time, this definition had
not quite established itself in the text-books (Heiberg, Mathematisches zu
Aristoteles, p. 9).
It was pointed out in Van Swinden's Elements of Geometry (Jacobi's
edition, 1834, pp. 1 1 4 — 5 ) that Euclid omits to state an essential part of the
definition, namely that "the corresponding sides must be opposite to equal
angles," which is necessary in order that the corresponding sides may follow
in the same order in both figures.
At the same time the definition states more than is absolutely necessary,
for it is true to say that two polygons are similar when, if the sides and angles
are taken in the same order, the angles are equal and the sides about the equal
angles are proportional,
omitting
(1) three consecutive angles,
or (2) two consecutive angles and the side common to them,
o

r

(3) two consecutive sides and the angle included by them,

and making no assumption with regard to the omitted sides and angles.
Austin objected to this definition on the ground that it is not obvious that
the properties (1) of having their angles respectively equal and (2) of having
the sides about the equal angles proportional can co-exist in two figures; but,
a definition not being concerned to prove the existence of the thing defined,
the objection falls to the ground. W e are properly left to satisfy ourselves as
to the existence of similar figures in the course of the exposition in Book vi.,
where we learn how to construct on any given straight line a rectilineal figure
similar to a given one (vi. 18).

