vi. DEFF. 2—s]

DEFINITIONS

189
•

DEFINITION 2.
The Greek text gives here a definition of reciprocally related figures
(imnrnrovodra ax/jfara).
" [Two] figures are reciprocally related when there
are in each of the two figures antecedent and consequent ratios" ("Ai'TI7R«jroi'6'dTa
o€ axqfjbaTCL io~Tiv orav iv CKartpw T W (T)erffJiilTW yyovpcvoi T« Kal t-n-ofxtvoi Xoyot
<!o-iv). No intelligible meaning can be attached to "antecedent and con­
sequent ratios " here; the sense would require rather " an antecedent and a
consequent of (two equal) ratios in each figure."
Hence Candalla and
Peyrard read Xoymv opoi ("terms of ratios") instead of Adyoi. Camerer reads
Xoyo>v without dpot. But the objection to the definition lies deeper. It is
never used; when we come, in vi. 14, 15, x i . 34 etc. to parallelograms,
triangles etc. having the property indicated, they are not called " reciprocal"
parallelograms etc., but parallelograms etc. "the sides of which are reciprocally
proportional," mv avratardvOaaiv 01 rktupaL Hence Simson appears to be
right in condemning the definition; it may have been interpolated from Heron,
who has it.
Simson proposes in his note to substitute the following definition.
"Two
magnitudes are said to be reciprocally proportional to two others when one
of the first is to one of the other magnitudes as the remaining one of the last
two is to the remaining one of the first." This definition requires that the
magnitudes shall be all of the same kind.
t

DEFINITION 3 .
"Axpov Kal fxftrnv Xoyov tvOtia TiTfirjo~&ai Aeycrcu, orav rj ws 7/ oXtj 77009 TO
/itifov Tfirjfia, ovrui? TO p-iifyv irpos TO iXarrov.

DEFINITION 4.
*Yi^os COT! 7RAKROS o"^»//LtaTos y diro T7S Kopvtftrjs
dyo/xivr).

iirl TT}I> fidaiv KA^cTOs

The definition of "height" is not found in Campanus and is perhaps
rightly suspected, since it does not apply in terms to parallelograms, parallele­
pipeds, cylinders and prisms, though it is used in the Elements with reference
to these latter figures. Aristotle does not appear to know altitude (ityos) in
the mathematical sense; he uses KaOirot of triangles (Meteorologica in. 3,
373 a 1 1 ) . T h e term is however readily understood, and scarcely requires
definition.

[DEFINITION 5.
Adyos Ik \6ymv o~vyK(to-8ai Acycrat, OTav 01 T W XdyutvrniAucdnrrcstip' cavrds
7roAAa7rAao'ia0'0€«rai TTOCWO-I riva.
"A ratio is said to be compounded of ratios when the sizes (mjAocdrirrcs) of
the ratios multiplied together make some (? ratio, or size)."J
As already remarked (pp. 1 1 6 , 132), it is beyond doubt that this definition
of ratio is interpolated. It has little MS. authority. T h e best MS. ( P ; only has
it in the margin; it is omitted altogether in Campanus' translation from the

