BOOK

VI

[vi. DEF. S

Arabic; and the other MSS. which contain it do not agree in the position
which they give to it. There is no reference to the definition in the place
where compound ratio is mentioned for the first time (vi. 23), nor anywhere
else in E u c l i d ; neither is it ever referred to by the other great geometers,
Archimedes, Apollonius and the rest. It appears to be only twice mentioned
at all, ( 1 ) in the passage of Eutocius referred to above (p. 1 1 6 ) and (2) by
Theon in his commentary on Ptolemy's o-wrafis. Moreover the content of
the definition is in itself suspicious.
It speaks of the "sizes of ratios being
multiplied together (literally, into themselves)," an operation unknown to
geometry. There is no wonder that Eutocius, and apparently Theon also, in
their efforts to explain it, had to give the word irijAiKorr/s a meaning which has
no application except in the case of such ratios as can be expressed by
numbers (Eutocius e.g. making it the "number by which the ratio is called").
Nor is it surprising that Wallis should have found it necessary to substitute
for the " quantitas " of Commandinus a different translation, " quantuplicity,"
which he said was represented by the "exponent of the ratio" (rationis exponens), what Peletarius had described as "denominatio ipsae proportionis"
and Clavius as "denominator." The fact is that the definition is ungeometrical
and useless, as was already seen by Savile, in whose view it was one of the
two blemishes in the body of geometry (the other being of course Postulate 5).
It is right to add that Hultsch (art. "Eukleides" in Pauly-Wissowa's RealEncyclopadie der elassisehen Altertumswissensehaft)
thought the definition
genuine.
His grounds are ( 1 ) that it stood in the iraA<u& CKSOO-I? repre­
sented by P (though P has it in the margin only) and (2) that some ex­
planation on the subject must have been given by way of preparation for
vi. 23, while there is nothing in the definition which is inconsistent with the
mode of statement of vi. 23. If the definition is after all genuine, I should
be inclined to regard it as a mere survival from earlier textbooks, like the first
of the two alternative definitions of a solid angle ( x i . Def. 1 1 ) ; for its form
seems to suit the old theory of proportion, applicable to commensurable
magnitudes only, better than the generalised theory of Eudoxus.

