CHAPTER
EUCLID

IN

VII.

ARABIA.

1

W E are told by Hajl Khalfa that the Caliph al-Mansur (754-775)
sent a mission to the Byzantine Emperor as the result of which he
obtained from him a copy of Euclid among other Greek books, and
again that the Caliph al-Ma'mun (813-833) obtained manuscripts of
Euclid, among others, from the Byzantines. T h e version of the
Elements by al-Hajjaj b. Yusuf b. Matar is, if not the very first, at
least one of the first books translated from the Greek into Arabic .
According to the Fihrist* it was translated by al-Hajjaj twice; the
first translation was known as " Haruni" (" for Harun "), the second
bore the name "Ma'muni" ("for al-Ma'mun") and was the more trust­
worthy. Six Books of the second of these versions survive in a Leiden
MS. (Codex Leidensis 399, 1) now in part published by Besthorn
and Heiberg . In the preface to this M S . it is stated that, in the reign
of Harun ar-Rashid (786-809), al-Hajjaj was commanded by Y a h y a
b. Khalid b. Barmak to translate the book into Arabic. Then, when
al-Ma'mun became Caliph, as he was devoted to learning, al-Hajjaj
saw that he would secure the favour of al-Ma'mun " if he illustrated
and expounded this book and reduced it to smaller dimensions.
He
accordingly left out the superfluities, filled up the gaps, corrected or
removed the errors, until he had gone through the book and reduced
it, when corrected and explained, to smaller dimensions, as in this
copy, but without altering the substance, for the use of men endowed
with ability and devoted to learning, the earlier edition being left in
the hands of readers."
The Fihrist goes on to say that the work was next translated by
Ishaq b. Hunain, and that this translation was improved by Thabit b,
Qurra. This Abu Ya'qub Ishaq b. Hunain b. Ishaq al-'Ibadl (d. 910)
was the son of the most famous of Arabic translators, Hunain b. Ishaq
al-'Ibadl (809-873), a Christian and physician to the Caliph alMutawakkil (847-861). There seems to be no doubt that Ishaq, who
2

4

1

Lexicon bibliogr. et encyclop. ed. Fliigel, III. pp. 9 1 , 92.
Klamroth, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenldndischen
Geselhchaft', XXXV. p . 303.
Fihrist (tr. Suter), p. 16.
* Codex Leidensis 3 9 9 , 1 . Euclidis Elementa ex interpretatione al-Hadschdschadschii
cum
commcntariis al-Narizii, Hauniae, part 1. i. 1893, part I. ii. 1897, part II. i. 1900, part II.
ii. 1905, part i l l . i. 1910.
2

3

