must have known Greek as well as his father, made his translation
direct from the Greek. T h e revision must apparently have been the
subject of an arrangement between Ishaq and Thabit, as the latter
died in 901 or nine years before Ishaq. Thabit undoubtedly consulted
Greek M S S . for the purposes of his revision. This is expressly stated
in a marginal note to a Hebrew version of the Elements, made from
Ishaq's, attributed to one of two scholars belonging to the same family,
viz. either to Moses b. Tibbon (about 1244-1274) or to Jakob b. Machir
(who died soon after 1306) . Moreover Thabit observes, on the pro­
position which he gives as IX. 31, that he had not found this proposition
and the one before it in the Greek but only in the Arabic; from which
statement Klamroth draws two conclusions, (1) that the Arabs had
already begun to interest themselves in the authenticity of the text
and (2) that Thabit did not alter the numbers of the propositions in
Ishaq's translation . T h e Fihrist also says that Yuhanna al-Qass (i.e.
" the Priest") had seen in the Greek copy in his possession the pro­
position in Book I. which Thabit took credit for, and that this was
confirmed by Nazlf, the physician, to whom Yuhanna had shown it.
This proposition may have been wanting in Ishaq, and Thabit may
have added it, but without claiming it as his own discovery . A s
a fact, I. 45 is missing in the translation by al-Hajjaj.
T h e original version of Ishaq without the improvements by Thabit
has probably not survived any more than the first of the two versions
by al-Hajjaj; the divergences between the M S S . are apparently due to
the voluntary or involuntary changes of copyists, the former class
varying according to the degree of mathematical knowledge possessed
by the copyists and the extent to which they were influenced by
considerations of practical utility for teaching purposes*. T w o M S S .
of the Ishaq-Thabit version exist in the Bodleian Library (No. 279
belonging to the year 1238, and No. 280 written in 1260-1) ; Books
I.—XIII. are in the Ishaq-Thabit version, the non-Euclidean Books
XIV., x v . in the translation of Qusta b. Luqa al-Ba'labakki (d. about
912). T h e first of these M S S . (No. 279) is that-tjO) used by Klamroth
for the purpose of his paper on the Arabian Euclid. T h e other M S .
used by Klamroth is ( K ) Kjobenhavn LXXXI, undated but probably
of the 13th c, containing Books V.—XV., Books V.—X. being in the
Ishaq-Thabit version, Books XI.—XIII. purporting to be in al-Hajjaj's
translation, and Books xiv., x v . in the version of Qusta b. Luqa. In
not a few propositions K and O show not the slightest difference, and,
even where the proofs show considerable differences, they are generally
such that, by a careful comparison, it is possible to reconstruct the
common archetype, so that it is fairly clear that we have in these cases,
not two recensions of one translation, but arbitrarily altered and
1

2

8

5

1

Steinschneider, Zeitschrift fiir Math. u. Physik, x x x i . , hist.-litt. Abtheilung, pp. 85,
86, 99.
Klamroth, p. 279.
Steinschneider, p. 88.
* Klamroth, p. 300.
T h e s e MSS. are described b y Nicoll and Pusey, Calalogus cod. mss. orient, bibl. Bodleianae, pt. II. 1835 (pp. 257—262).
2

5

8

