shortened copies of one and the same recension*. T h e Bodleian M S .
No. 280 contains a preface, translated by Nicoll, which cannot be by
Thabit himself because it mentions Avicenna (980-1037) and other
later authors. T h e M S . was written at Maraga in the year 1260-1 and
has in the margin readings and emendations from the edition of
NasJraddin at-TusI (shortly to be mentioned) who was living at Maraga
at the time. Is it possible that at-TusI himself is the author of the
preface"? Be this as it may, the preface is interesting because it
throws light on the liberties which the Arabians allowed themselves
to take with the text. After the observation that the book (in spite
of the labours of many editors) is not free from errors, obscurities,
redundancies, omissions etc., and is without certain definitions neces­
sary for the proofs, it goes on to say that the man has not yet been
found who could make it perfect, and next proceeds to explain
(1) that Avicenna "cut out postulates and many Definitions" and
attempted to clear up difficult and obscure passages, (2) that Abu'l
Wafa al-Buzjani (939-997) "introduced unnecessary additions and
left out many things of great importance and entirely necessary,"
inasmuch as he was too long in various places in Book VI. and too
short in Book X. where he left out entirely the proofs of the apotomae,
while he made an unsuccessful attempt to emend XII. 14, (3) that A b u
Ja'far al-Khazin (d. between 961 and 9 7 1 ) arranged the postulates
excellently but " disturbed the number and order of the propositions,
reduced several propositions to one " etc. N e x t the preface describes
the editor's own claims' and then ends with the sentences, " But we
have kept to the order of the books and propositions in the work itself
(i.e. Euclid's) except in the twelfth and thirteenth books. For we have
dealt in Book XIII. with the (solid) bodies and in Book XII. with the
surfaces by themselves."
After Thabit the Fihrist mentions A b u 'Uthman ad-Dimashql as
having translated some Books of the Elements including Book X. (It
is A b u 'Uthman's translation of Pappus' commentary on Book X.
which Woepcke discovered at Paris.) T h e Fihrist
adds also that
" Nazlf the physician told me that he had seen the tenth Book of
Euclid in Greek, that it had 40 propositions more than the version
in common circulation which had 109 propositions, and that he had
determined to translate it into Arabic."
But the third form of the Arabian Euclid actually accessible to us
is the edition of A b u Ja'far Muh. b. Muh. b. al-Hasan Naslraddin
at-TusI (whom we shall call at-TusI for short), born at T u s (in
Khurasan) in 1201 (d. 1274). This edition appeared in two forms, a
larger and a smaller. T h e larger is said to survive in Florence only
(Pal. 272 and 313, the latter M S . containing only six Books); this was
published at Rome in 1594, and, remarkably enough, some copies of
1

Klamroth, pp. 306—8.
-* Steinschneider, p. 98.
Heiberg has quoted the whole of this preface in the
Zeitschrift
fiir Math. u. Phyiik, x x i x . , hist.-litt. A b t h . p . 16.
' T h i s seems to include a rearrangement of the contents of Books XIV., XV. added to the
Elements.

