this edition are to be found with 12 and some with 13 Books, some
with a Latin title and some without'. But the book was printed in
Arabic, so that Kastner remarks that he will say as much about it as
can be said about a book which one cannot read". T h e shorter form,
which however, in most M S S . , is in 15 Books, survives at Berlin, Munich,
Oxford, British Museum (974, 1334*, 1335), Paris (2465, 2466), India
Office, and Constantinople; it was printed at Constantinople in
1801, and the first six Books at Calcutta in 1824 .
At-Tusl's work is however not a translation of Euclid's text, but a
re-written Euclid based on the older Arabic translations. In this
respect it seems to be like the Latin version of the Elements
by
Campanus (Campano), which was first published by Erhard Ratdolt
at Venice in 1482 (the first printed edition of Euclid"). Campanus
(13th c.) was a mathematician, and it is likely enough that he allowed
himself the same liberty as at-TusI in reproducing Euclid. What­
ever may be the relation between Campanus' version and that of
Athelhard of Bath (about 1120), and whether, as Curtze thinks , they
both used one and the same Latin version of 10th—I ith c, or whether
Campanus used Athelhard's version in the same way as at-TusI used
those of his predecessors , it is certain that both versions came from
an Arabian source, as is evident from the occurrence of Arabic words
in them . Campanus' version is not of much service for the purpose
of forming a judgment on the relative authenticity of the Greek and
Arabian tradition; but it sometimes preserves traces of the purer
source, as when it omits Theon's addition to V I . 33'. A curious
circumstance is that, while Campanus' version agrees with at-TusI's
in the number of the propositions in all the genuine Euclidean Books
except V. and I X . , it agrees with Athelhard's in having 34 propositions
in Book V . (as against 25 in other versions), which confirms the view
that the two are not independent, and also leads, as Klamroth says,
to this dilemma: either the additions to Book v. are Athelhard's
own, or he used an Arabian Euclid which is not known to us".
Heiberg also notes that Campanus' Books X I V . , X V . show a certain
agreement with the preface to the Thabit-Ishaq version, in which the
author claims to have (1) given a method of inscribing spheres in the
five regular solids, (2) carried further the solution of the problem how
4

6

7

8

1

Suter, Die Mathematiker
und Astronomen
der A fader, p. 1 5 1 . T h e Latin title is
Euclidis
elementorum geometricorum libri tredecim.
Ex traditionc doctissimi
Nasiridini
Tusini nunc primum arabice impressi.
R o m a e in typographia Medicea MDXCIV.
Cum
licentia superiorum.
' Kastner, Geschichte der Mathemalik,
I. p . 367.
* Suter has a note that this MS. is very old, having been copied from the original in the
author's lifetime.
* Suter, p. m ,
! Described by Kastner, Geschichte der Mathemalik,
I. p p . 389—199, and by Weisse n b o m , Die Ubersctzungen des Euklid durch Campano und Zamberti, Halle a. S., 1882,
p p . 1 — 7 . See also infra, Chapter VIII, p. 97.
* Sonderabdruck des Jahresberichtes uber die Fortschritte der hlassischen
Altcrthumswissenschaft mm Okt. 1 8 7 9 — 1 8 8 1 , Berlin, 1884.
K l a m r o t h , p. 2 7 1 .
* Curtze, op. cit. p. 1 0 ; H e i b e r g , Euilid-Studien,
p. 178.
* Heiberg's Euclid, v o l . V. p . ci.
K l a m r o t h , pp. 273—4.
7

1 0

