O n the other hand the contraction of ill. I I , 12 into one proposition
in the Arabic tells in favour of the Arabic.
Further, the ornission of certain porisms in the Arabic cannot be
supported; for Pappus quotes the porism to X I I I . 17 , Proclus those
to II. 4, I I I . 1, V I I . 2", and Simplicius that to I V . 1.5.
Lastly, some propositions omitted in the Arabic are required in
later propositions. Thus x. 13 is used in x. 18, 22, 23, 26 etc.; x. 17
is wanted in X. 18, 26, 36; X I I . 6, 13 are required for X I I . 11 and X I I .
15 respectively.
It must also be remembered that some of the things which were
properly omitted by the Arabians are omitted or marked as doubtful
in Greek M S S . also, especially in P, and others are rightly suspected for
other reasons (e.g. a number of alternative proofs, lemmas, and porisms,
as well as the analyses and syntheses of X I I I . 1—5). On the other
hand, the Arabic has certain interpolations peculiar to our inferior
M S S . (cf. the definition V I . Def. 2 and those of proportion and ordered
proportion).
Heiberg comes to the general conclusion that, not only is the
Arabic tradition not to be preferred offhand to that of the Greek M S S . ,
but it must be regarded as inferior in authority. It is a question
how far the differences shown in the Arabic are due to the use of
Greek M S S . differing from those which have been most used as the
basis of our text, and how far to the arbitrary changes made by
the Arabians themselves. Changes of order and arbitrary omissions
could not surprise us, in view of the preface above quoted from the
Oxford M S . of Thabit-Ishaq, with its allusion to the many important
and necessary things left out by A b u '1 Wafa and to the author's,
own rearrangement of Books X I I . , X I I I .
But there is evidence of
differences due to the use by the Arabs of other Greek M S S . Heiberg
is able to show considerable resemblances between the Arabic text
and the Bologna M S . b in that part of the M S . where it diverges so
remarkably from our other M S S . (see the short description of it above,
p. 49); in illustration he gives a comparison of the proofs of X I I . 7 in b
and in the Arabic respectively, and points to the omission in both of
the proposition given in Gregory's edition as X I . 38, and to a remark­
able agreement between them as regards the order of the propositions
of Book X I I . A s above stated, the remarkable divergence of b only
affects Books X I . (at end) and X I I . ; and Book X I I I . in b shows none
of the transpositions and other peculiarities of the Arabic. There
are many differences between b and the Arabic, especially in the
definitions of Book X I . , as well as in Book X I I I . It is therefore a
question whether the Arabians made arbitrary changes, or the Arabic
form is the more ancient, and b has been altered through contact
with other M S S .
Heiberg points out that the Arabians must be alone
responsible for their definition of a prism, which only covers a prism
with a triangular base. This could not have been Euclid's own, for
the word prism already has the wider me.aning in Archimedes, and
1

3

3

Zeitsehrift fiir Math.

u. Physik,

' Proclus, p p . 303—4.
XXIX.:., hist.-litt. Abtli. p. 6 s q q .

