Euclid himself speaks of prisms with parallelograms and polygons
as bases (XI. 39; XII. 10). Moreover, a Greek would not have been
likely to leave out the definitions of the " Platonic" regular solids.
Heiberg considers that the Arabian translator had before him
a M S . which was related to b, but diverged still further from the rest
of our M S S . He does not think that there is evidence of the existence of
a redaction of Books I . — x . similar to that of Books x i . , XII. in b ; for
Klamroth observes that it is the Books on solid geometry ( X I . — X I I I . )
which are more remarkable than the others for omissions and shorter
proofs, and it is a noteworthy coincidence that it is just in these
Books that we have a divergent text in b.
A n advantage in the Arabic version is the omission of VII. Def. 10,
although, as Iamblichus had it, it may have been deliberately omitted
by the Arabic translator. Another advantage is the omission of the
analyses and syntheses of XIII. 1—5 ; but again these may have been
omitted purposely, as were evidently a number of porisms which
are really necessary.
One or two remarks may be added about the Arabic versions
as compared with one another.
Al-Hajjaj's object seems to have
been less to give a faithful reflection of the original than to write
a useful and convenient mathematical text-book. One characteristic
of it is the careful references to earlier propositions when their results
are used. Such specific quotations of earlier propositions are rare in
Euclid ; but in al-Hajjaj we find not only such phrases as " by prop,
so and so," " which was proved " or " which we showed how to do in
prop, so and so," but also still longer phrases. Sometimes he- repeats
a construction, as in I. 44 where, instead of constructing "the parallelo­
gram BEFG
equal to the triangle C in the angle EBG which is equal
to the angle D" and placing it in a certain position, he produces AB
to G, making BG equal to half DE (the base of the triangle CDE in
his figure), and on GB so constructs the parallelogram BHKG
by
I. 42 that it is equal to the triangle CDE, and its angle GBH is equal
to the given angle.
Secondly, al-Hajjaj, in the arithmetical books, in the theory of
proportion, in the applications of the Pythagorean I. 47, and generally
where possible, illustrates the proofs by numerical examples. It is
true, observes Klamroth, that these examples are not apparently
separated from the commentary of an-NairizI, and might not there­
fore have been due to al-Hajjaj himself; but the marginal notes to
the Hebrew translation in Municn M S . 36 show that these additions
were in the copy of al-Hajjaj used by the translator, for they expressly
give these proofs in numbers as variants taken from al-Hajjaj .
These characteristics, together with al-Hajjaj's freer formulation
of the propositions and expansion of the proofs, constitute an in­
telligible reason why Ishaq should have undertaken a fresh translation
from the Greek. Klamroth calls Ishaq's version a model of a good
translation of a mathematical t e x t ; the introductory and transitional
1

1

Klamroth, p. 3 1 0 ; Steinschneider, p p . 8}—6.

