phrases are stereotyped and few in number, the technical terms are
simply and consistently rendered, and the less formal expressions
connect themselves as closely with the Greek as is consistent with
intelligibility and the character of the Arabic language. Only in
isolated cases does the formulation of definitions and enunciations
differ to any considerable extent from the original. In general, his
object seems to have been to get rid of difficulties and unevennesses
in the Greek text by neat devices, while at the same time giving a
faithful reproduction of it .
There are curious points of contact between the versions of
al-Hajjaj and Thabit-Ishaq. For example, the definitions and
enunciations of propositions are often word for word the same.
Presumably this is owing to the fact that Ishaq found these de­
finitions and enunciations already established in the schools in his
time, where they would no doubt be learnt by heart, and refrained
from translating them afresh, merely adopting the older version with
some changes'. Secondly, there is remarkable agreement between
the Arabic versions as regards the figures, which show considerable
variations from the figures of the Greek text, especially as regards
the letters; this is also probably to be explained in the same way,
all the later translators having most likely borrowed al-Hajjaj's
adaptation of the Greek figures . Lastly, it is remarkable that the
version of Books x i . — x m . in the Kjybenhavn M S . (K), purporting
to be by al-Hajjaj, is almost exactly the same as the Thabit-Ishaq
version of the same Books in O . Klamroth conjectures that Ishaq
may not have translated the Books on solid geometry at all, and that
Thabit took them from al-Hajjaj, only making some changes in order
to fit them to the translation of Ishaq .
From the facts ( i ) that at-Tusi's edition had the same number
of propositions (468) as al-Hajjaj's version, while Thabit-Ishaq's had
478, and (2) that at-Tusi has the same careful references to earlier
propositions, Klamroth concludes that at-Tusi deliberately preferred
al-Hajjaj's version to that of Ishaq . Heiberg, however,, points out
(1) that at-Tusi left out V I . 12 which, if we may judge by Klamroth's
silence, al-Hajjaj had, and (2) al-Hajjaj's version had one proposition
less in Books I. and I I I . than at-Tusi has. Besides, in a passage quoted
by Haji Khalfa" from at-Tusi, the latter says that " he separated the
things which, in the approved editions, were taken from the archetype
from the things which had been added thereto," indicating that he
had compiled his edition from both the earlier translations .
There were a large number of Arabian commentaries on, or
reproductions of, the Elements
or portions thereof, which will be
1

8

4

5

7

1

K l a m r o t h , p . 290, illustrates Ishaq's method b y his way of distinguishing i<papnb£tLv
(to be congruent with) and tipapnifcaSai (to be applied to), the confusion of which b y trans­
lators was animadverted on by Savile. Ishaq avoided the confusion b y using two entirely
different words.
' Klamroth, p p . 3 1 0 — 1 .
ibid. p. 287.
* ibid. pp. 304—5.
* ibid, p / 2 7 4 .
• H a j i Khalfa, I. p. 383.
H e i b e r g , Zeitsehriftfiir
Math, u: Physik, XXIX., hist.-litt. A b t h . p p . 2, 3.
8

7

