of the circle, on the approximate determination of the chord (side) of
the nonagon, on the division of triangles and quadrilaterals and con­
structions for that purpose, on the manner of construction of a circle
which is equal to the surface of a given cylinder, on the division of
the circle, in three chapters etc.
12. T h e physician N a z i f b. Y u m n (or Yaman) al-Qass ("the
priest") is mentioned by the Fihrist as having seen a Greek copy
of Eucl. Book X . which had 40 more propositions than that which
was in general circulation (containing 109), and having determined
to translate it into Arabic . Fragments of such a translation exist
at Paris, Nos. 18 and 34 of the M S . 2457 (952, 2 Suppl. Arab, in
Woepcke's tract); No. 18 contains " additions to some propositions
of the 10th Book, existing in the Greek language"." Nazif must have
died about 990'.
13. Y u h a n n a b. Yusuf b. al-Harith b. al-Bitrlq a l - Q a s s (d. about
980) lectured on the Elements
and other geometrical books, made
translations from the Greek, and wrote a tract on the " proof" of the
case of two straight lines both meeting a third and making with it,
on one side, two angles together less than two right angles*. Nothing
of his appears to survive, except that a tract "on rational and irrational
magnitudes," No. 48 in the Paris M S . just mentioned, is attributed
to him.
1 4 A b u Muh. a l - H a s a n b. 'Ubaidallah b. Sulaiman b. W a h b
(d. 901) was a geometer of distinction, who wrote works under the
two distinct titles " A commentary on the difficult parts of the work
of Euclid" and " T h e Book on Proportion'." Suter thinks that an­
other reading is possible in the case of the second title, and that it
may refer to the Euclidean work " on the divisions (of figures)*."
15. Qusta b. L u q a al-Ba'labakki (d. about 912), a physician,
philosopher, astronomer, mathematician and translator, wrote " on the
difficult passages of Euclid's book" and "on the solution of arith­
metical problems from the third book of E u c l i d " ; also an "intro­
duction to geometry," in the form of question and answer .
16. T h a b i t b. Qurra (826-901), besides translating some parts
of Archimedes and Books V . — V I I . of the Conks of Apollonius, and
revising Ishaq's translation of Euclid's Elements, also revised the trans­
lation of the Data by the same Ishaq and the book On divisions
of
figures
translated by an anonymous writer.
W e are told also
that he wrote the following works: (1) On the Premisses (Axioms,
Postulates etc.) of Euclid, (2) On the Propositions of Euclid, (3) O n
the propositions and questions which arise when two straight lines
are cut by a third (or on the "proof" of Euclid's famous postulate).
The last tract is extant in the M S . discovered by Woepcke (Paris
457i 3 °)- He is also credited with "an excellent work" in the
shape of an " Introduction to the Book of Euclid," a treatise on
1

7

9

2

2

1

Fihrist, pp. 16, 1 7 .
* W o e p c k e , Mim.prls.
h Vacad. des sciences, XIV. p p . 666, 668.
* Suter, p. 68.
* Fihrist, p. 3 8 ; Suter, p . 60.
' Fihrist, p . 1 6 , and Suter's note, p. 60.
* Suter, p. 1 1 1 , note 1 3 .
Fihrist, p . 43.
» Fihrist, p. 4 3 ; Suter, p . 41.
7

