Geometry dedicated to Ismail b. Bulbul, a Compendium of Geometry,
and a large number of other works for the titles of which reference
may be made to Suter, who also gives particulars as to which are
extant .
17. Abu Sa'ld Sinan b. Thabit b. Qurra, the son of the translator
of Euclid, followed in his father's footsteps as geometer, astronomer
and physician. He wrote an " improvement of the book of
on
the Elements of Geometry, in which he made various additions to the
original." It is natural to conjecture that Euclid is the name missing
in this description (by Ibn abl Usaibi'a); Casiri has the name Aqaton'.
The latest editor of the Ta'rikh al-Hukama,
however, makes the name
to be Iflaton ( = Plato), and he refers to the statement by the Fihrist
and Ibn al-Qifti attributing to Plato a work on the Elements of
Geometry translated by Qusta. It is just possible, therefore, that at
the time of Qusta the Arabs were acquainted with a book on the
Elements of Geometry translated from the Greek, which they attri­
buted to Plato . Sinan died in 943.
18. A b u Sahl Wljan (or Waijan) b. Rustam a l - K u h i (fl. 988),
born at K u h in Tabaristan, a distinguished geometer and astronomer,
wrote, according to the Fihrist, a " Book of the Elements " after that
of E u c l i d ; the 1st and 2nd Books survive at Cairo, and a part of
the 3rd Book at Berlin (5922)°. He wrote also a number of other
geometrical works: Additions to the 2nd Book of Archimedes on
the Sphere and Cylinder (extant at Paris, at Leiden, and in the India
Office), On the finding of the side of a heptagon in a circle (India
Office and Cairo), On two mean proportionals (India Office), which
last may be only a part of the Additions to Archimedes' On the Sphere
and Cylinder, etc.
19.' A b u Nasr Muh. b. Muh. b. Tarkhan b. Uzlag al-Farabi
(870-950) wrote a commentary on the difficulties of the introductory
matter to Books I. and V . " This appears to survive in the Hebrew
translation which is, with probability, attributed to Moses b. Tibbon .
20. A b u ' A l l al-Hasan b. al-Hasan b. a l - H a i t h a m (about 9651039), known by the name Ibn al-Haitham or Abu 'AlI-al-Basri, was a
man of great powers and knowledge, and no one of his time approached
him in the field of mathematical science. He wrote several works on
Euclid the titles of which, as translated by Woepcke from Usaibi'a,
are as follows :
1. Commentary and abridgment of the Elements.
2. Collection of the Elements of Geometry and Arithmetic,
drawn from the treatises of Euclid and Apollonius.
3. Collection of the Elements of the Calculus deduced from
the principles laid down by Euclid in his Elements.
1

3

4

7

8

1

Suter, pp. 34—8.
Fihrist (ed. Suter), p. 59, note 132 ; Suter, p. 52, note b.
See Suter in Bibliotheca
Mathematica,
i v , 1903-4, pp. 296—7,
Lippert's Ibn al-Qifti.
Tdrich al-hukamd, Leipzig, 1903.
Fihrist, p. 40.
" Suter, p. 75.
Suter, p. 5 5 .
Steinschneider, p. 92.
Steinschneider, pp. 92—3.
2

8

8

4

6

8

7

review of

Julius

