CHAPTER
GREEK

III.

C O M M E N T A T O R S O N T H E ELEMENTS
THAN PROCLUS.

OTHER

THAT there was no lack of commentaries on the Elements before
the time of Proclus is evident from the terms in which Proclus refers
to them; and he leaves us in equally little doubt as to the value
which, in his opinion, the generality of them possessed. Thus he says
in one place (at the end of his second prologue) :
" Before making a beginning with the investigation of details,
I warn those who may read me not to expect from me the things
which have been dinned into our ears ad nauseam (SiaTedpvXriTat,) by
those who have preceded me, viz. lemmas, cases, and so forth. For
I am surfeited with these things and shall give little attention to them.
But I shall direct my remarks principally to the points which require
deeper study and contribute to the sum of philosophy, therein emulating
the Pythagoreans who even had this common phrase for what I mean
' a figure and a platform, but not a figure and sixpence".'"
In another place he s a y s : " Let us now turn to the elucidation
of the things proved by the writer of the Elements, selecting the more
subtle of the comments made on them by the ancient writers, while
cutting down their interminable diffuseness, giving the things which
are more systematic and follow scientific methods, attaching more
importance to the working-out of the real subject-matter than" to the
variety of cases and lemmas to which we see recent writers devoting
themselves for the most part."
A t the end of his commentary on Eucl. I. Prockis remarks that
the commentaries then in vogue were full of all sorts of confusion, and
contained no account of causes, no dialectical discrimination, and no
philosophic thought.
These passages and two others in which Proclus refers to "the
commentators " suggest that these commentators were numerous.
H e does not however give many names; and no doubt the only
important commentaries were those of Heron, Porphyry, and Pappus.
1

3

4

5

1

Proclus, p. 84, 8.
i.e. we reach a certain height, use the platform so attained as a base on which to build
another stage, then use that as a base and so on.
3

3

Proclus, p. 200,

10.

4

ibid.

p. 431,

15.

5

ibid.

p. 289,

1 1 ; p. 328,

16.

