INTRODUCTION

20

[CH. I l l

I. Heron.
Proclus alludes to Heron twice as Heron mec/ianicus , in another
place' he associates him with Ctesibius, and in the three other
passages where Heron is mentioned there is no reason to doubt that
the same person is meant, namely Heron of Alexandria. T h e date of
Heron is still a vexed question. In the early stages of the controversy
much was made of the supposed relation of Heron to Ctesibius. T h e
best MS. of Heron's Belopoeica has the heading "H/woro? KTjjo-t/Siou
fieXoirouicd, and an anonymous Byzantine writer of the tenth century,
evidently basing himself on this title, speaks of Ctesibius as Heron's
Ka0riyrjTTi<!, " master " or " teacher." W e know of two men of the name
of Ctesibius. One was a barber who lived in the time of Ptolemy
Euergetes I I , i.e. Ptolemy V I I , called Physcon (died 117 B.C.), and
who is said to have made an improved water-organ . T h e other was a
mechanician mentioned b y Athenaeus as having made an elegant
drinking-horn in the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-247 B.C.)'.
Martin took the Ctesibius in question to be the former and accord­
ingly placed Heron at the beginning of the first century B.C., say
126-50 B.C But Philo of Byzantium , who repeatedly mentions Ctesi­
bius by name, says that the first mechanicians had the advantage of
being under kings who loved fame and supported the arts. Hence our
Ctesibius is more likely to have been the earlier Ctesibius who was
contemporary with Ptolemy II Philadelphus.
But, whatever be the date of Ctesibius, we cannot safely conclude
that Heron was his immediate pupil. T h e title " Heron's (edition of)
Ctesibius's Belopoeica" does not, in fact, justify any inference as to
the interval of time between the two works.
W e now have better evidence for a terminus post quern. T h e
Metrica of Heron, besides quoting Archimedes and Apollonius, twice
refers to " the books about straight lines (chords) in a circle " (h toi?
irepl TCOV it) KvicXtp evdeiwv). Now we know of no work giving a Table
of Chords earlier than that of Hipparchus. W e get, therefore, at
once, 150 B.C. or thereabouts as the terminus post quern. But, again,
Heron's Mechanica quotes a definition of " centre of gravity " as given
by " Posidonius, a Stoic " : and, even if this Posidonius lived before
Archimedes, as the context seems to imply, it is certain that another
work o f Heron's, the Definitions, owes something to Posidonius of
Apamea or Rhodes, Cicero's teacher (135-51 B.C.). This brings Heron's
date down to the end of the first century B.C., at least.
W e have next to consider the relation, if any, between Heron and
Vitruvius. In his De Architectura, brought out apparently in 14 B.C.,
Vitruvius quotes twelve authorities on machinationes including Archytas
1

3

4

6

7

1

Proclus, p. 305, 24 ; p. 346, 13.

3

ibid. p. 41, 10.

3

ibid.

4

Athenaeus, Dcipno-Soph.

p. 196, 1 6 ; p. 323, 7 ; p. 4 1 9 , 1 3 .

iv., c. 75, p. 174 b—e..

' ibid, xi., c. 97, p. 497 b—c.
' Martin, Recherches
sur la vie et Us ouvrages
7

Philo, Median.

Synt.,

d'ffiron

p. 50, 38, ed. Schone.

d'A/exandrie,

Paris, 1854, p. 37.

