(second), Archimedes (third), Ctesibius (fourth) and Philo of Byzan­
tium (sixth), but does not mention Heron. Nor is it possible to
establish inter-dependence between Vitruvius and Heron; the differ­
ences between them seem on the whole more numerous and important
than the resemblances (e.g. Vitruvius uses 3 as the value of IT, while
Heron always uses the Archimedean value i \ \ T h e inference is that
Heron can hardly have written earlier than the first century A.D.
The most recent theory of Heron's date makes him later than
Claudius Ptolemy the astronomer (100-178 A.D.). T h e arguments are
mainly these. (1) Ptolemy claims as a discovery of his own a method
of measuring the distance between two places (as an arc of a great
circle on the earth's surface) in the case where the places are neither
on the same meridian nor on the same parallel circle. Heron, in his
Dioptra, speaks of this method as of a thing generally known to
experts. (2) The dioptra described in Heron's work is a fine and
accurate instrument, much better than anything Ptolemy had at his
disposal. (3) Ptolemy, in his work Hepl poirmv, asserted that water
with water round it has no weight and that the diver, however deep
he dives, does not feel the weight of the water above him. Heron,
strangely enough, accepts as true what Ptolemy says of the diver, but
is dissatisfied with the explanation given by " some," namely that it is
because water is uniformly heavy—this seems to be equivalent to
Ptolemy's dictum that water in water has no weight—and he essays a
different explanation based on Archimedes. (4) It is suggested that
the Dionysius to whom Heron dedicated his Definitions is a certain
Dionysius who was praefectus urbi in 301 A.D.
On the other hand Heron was earlier than Pappus, who was
writing under Diocletian (284-305 A.D.), for Pappus alludes to and
draws upon the works of Heron. T h e net result, then, of the most
recent research is to place Heron in the third century A.D. and perhaps
little earlier than Pappus. Heiberg accepts this conclusion, which
may therefore, perhaps, be said to hold the field for the present*.
That Heron wrote a systematic commentary on the Elements
might be inferred from Proclus, but it is rendered quite certain b y
references to the commentary in Arabian writers, and particularly in
an-Nairlzi's commentary on the first ten Books of the Elements. T h e
Fihrist says, under Euclid, that " Heron wrote a commentary on this
book [the Elements], endeavouring to solve its., difficulties*"; and
under Heron, " He wrote: the book of explanation of the obscurities
in Euclid ...." An-NairizI's commentary quotes Heron by name very
frequently, and often in such a way as to leave no doubt that the
author had Heron's work actually before him. Thus the extracts are
given in the first person, introduced by "Heron says" ("Dixit Y r i n u s "
1

4

1

Heronis

2

Fuller details of the various arguments will be found in my History
1921, vol. 11., pp. 398—306.

matics,
3

4

AUxandrini

opera,

Das Mathcmatikcr-Verzcichniss
ibid. p. 1 1 .

vol. V. (Teuhner, 1914), p. ix.

im Fihrist

(tr. Suter), p. 16.

of Greek

Mathe­

