or " H e r o n " ) ; and in other places we are told that Heron " says
nothing," or " is not found to have said anything," on such and such
a proposition. The commentary of an-Nairizi is in part edited by
Besthorn and Heiberg from a Leiden MS. of the translation of the
Elements by al-Hajjaj with the commentary attached . But this MS.
only contains six Books, and several pages in the first Book, which
contain the comments of Simplicius on the first twenty-two defini­
tions of the first Book, are missing. Fortunately the commentary of
an-Nairizi has been discovered in a more complete form, in a Latin
translation by Gherardus Cremonensis of the twelfth century, which
contains the missing comments by Simplicius and an-Nairizi's com­
ments on the first ten Books. This valuable work has recently been
edited by Curtze*.
Thus from the three sources, Proclus, and the two versions of
an-Nairizi, which supplement one another, we are able to form a very
good idea of the character of Heron's commentary. In some cases
observations given by Proclus without the name of their author are
seen from an-Nairizi to be Heron's; in a few cases notes attributed
by Proclus to Heron are found in an-Nairizi without Heron's name;
and, curiously enough, one alternative proof (of I. 25) given as Heron's
by Proclus is introduced by the A r a b with the remark that he has
not been able to discover who is the author.
Speaking generally, the comments of Heron do not seem to have
contained much that can be called important. W e find
(1) A few general notes, e.g. that Heron would not admit more
than three axioms.
(2) Distinctions of a number of particular cases of Euclid's pro­
positions according as the figure is drawn in one way or in another.
Of this class are the different cases of I. 35, 36, i l l . 7, 8 (where the
chords to be compared are drawn on different sides of the diameter
instead of on the same side), HI. 12 (which is not Euclid's, but Heron's
own, adding the case of external contact to that of internal contact in
III. 11), VI. 19 (where the triangle in„which an additional line is drawn
is taken to be the smaller of the two), VII. 19 (where he gives the
particular case of three numbers in continued proportion, instead of
four proportionals).
(3) Alternative proofs. O f these there should be mentioned (a)
the proofs of II. I — 1 0 "without a figure," being simply the algebraic
forms of proof, easy but uninstructive, which are so popular nowadays,
the proof of III. 25 (placed after III. 30' and starting from the arc
instead of the chord), III. 10 (proved by III. 9), III. 13 (a proof
preceded by a lemma to the effect that a straight line cannot meet a
circle in more than two points). Another class of alternative proof is
1

1

Codex

Leideusis

399,

I.

Euclidis

Elementa

ex

interprctatione

al-Hadschdschadschii

cum commentariis
al-Narizii.
Five parts carrying the work to the end of Book iv. were
issued in 1893, 1897, 1900, 1905 and 1910 respectively.
2

Anaritii

Gherardi

in

decern

Cremonensis...edidit

libros

priores

elementorum

Euclidis

commenlarii

ex

Maximilianus Curtze (Teubner, Leipzig, 1899).

interprctatione

