(b) that which is intended to meet a particular objection (evtrracrii)
which had been or might be raised to Euclid's construction. Thus
in certain cases he avoids producing a particular straight line, where
Euclid produces it, in order to meet the objection of any one who should
deny our right to assume that there is any space available .
Of this
class are Heron's proofs of I. 1 1 , 1 . 20, and his note on I. 16. Similarly
on I. 48 he supposes the right-angled triangle which is constructed to
be constructed on the same side of the common side as the given
triangle is. A third class (c) is that which avoids reductio ad
absurdum.
Thus, instead of indirect proofs, Heron gives direct
proofs of I. 19 (for which he requires, and gives, a preliminary
lemma), and of I. 25.
(4) Heron supplies certain converses of Euclid's propositions,
e.g. converses of II. 12, 13, VIII. 27.
(5) A few additions to, and extensions of, Euclid's propositions
are also found. Some are unimportant, e.g. the construction of isosceles
and scalene triangles in a note on I. I, the construction of two tangents
in III. 17, the remark that VII. 3 about finding the greatest common
measure of three numbers can be applied to as many numbers as we
please (as Euclid tacitly assumes in VII. 31). The most irrfportant
extension is that of III. 20 to the case where the angle at the
circumference is greater than a right angle, and the direct deduction
from this extension of the result of III. 22. Interesting also are the
notes on I. 37 (on I. 24 in Proclus), where Heron proves that two
triangles with two sides of one equal to two sides of the other and
with the included angles supplementary are equal, and compares the
areas where the snm of the two included angles (one being supposed
greater than the other) is less or greater than two right angles, and
on I. 47, where there is a proof (depending on preliminary lemmas) of
the fact that, in the figure of the proposition, the straight lines AL,
BK, CF meet in a point. After IV. 16 there is a proof that, in a
regular polygon with an even number of sides, the bisector of one
angle also bisects its opposite, and an enunciation of the corresponding
proposition for a regular polygon with an odd number of sides.
Van Pesch* gives reason for attributing to Heron certain other
notes found in Proclus, viz. that they are designed to meet the same
sort of points as Heron had in view in other notes undoubtedly written
by him. These are (a) alternative proofs of I. 5, I. 17, and I. 32,
which avoid the producing of certain straight lines, (b) an alternative
proof of I. 9 avoiding the construction of the equilateral triangle on
the side of BC opposite to A ; (c) partial converses of I. 35—38, starting
from the equality of the areas and the fact of the parallelograms or
triangles being in the same parallels, and proving that the bases are
the same or equal, may also be Heron's. Van Pesch further supposes
that it was in Heron's commentary that the proof by Menelaus of
I. 25 and the proof by Philo of I. 8 were given.
1

1

Cf. Proclus, 175, 7 el li \iym TII T6to» /ui) elSinai,.., 389, 18 \eyet OVP Tit 0V1 OVK ICTI
TOTOt....
a

Dt Proclifonlibus,

Lugduni-Batavorum, 1900,

