The last reference to Heron made by an-Nairizi occurs in the note
on VIII. 27, so that the commentary of the former must at least have
reached that point.
II. Porphyry.
The Porphyry here mentioned is of course the Neo-Platonist who
lived about 232-304 A.D. Whether he really wrote a systematic
commentary on the Elements is uncertain. The passages in Proclus
which seem to make this probable are two in which he mentions him
(1) as having demonstrated the necessity of the words "not on the
same side " in the enunciation of I. 14 , and (2) as having pointed out
the necessity of understanding correctly the enunciation of I. 26, since,
if the particular injunctions as to the sides of the triangles to be taken
as equal are not regarded, the student may easily fall into error'.
These passages, showing that Porphyry carefully analysed Euclid's
enunciations in these cases, certainly suggest that his remarks were
part of a systematic commentary. Further, the list of mathematicians
in the Fihrist gives Porphyry as having written " a book on the
Elements." It is true that Wenrich takes this book to have been a
work by Porphyry mentioned by Suidas and Proclus ( Theolog. Platan.),
irepl dpxtov libri II.'
There is nothing of importance in the notes attributed to Porphyry
by Proclus.
(1) Three alternative proofs of I. 20, which avoid producing a side
of the triangle, are assigned to Heron and Porphyry without saying
which belonged to which. If the first of the three was Heron's, I
agree with van Pesch that it is more probable that the two others
were both Porphyry's than that the second was Heron's and only the
third Porphyry's. For they are similar in character, and the third
uses a result obtained in the second .
(2) Porphyry gave an alternative proof of I. 18 to meet a childish
objection which is supposed to require the part of AC equal to AB to
be cut off from CA and not from A C.
Proclus gives a precisely similar alternative proof of I. 6 to meet a
similar supposed objection ; and it may well be that, though Proclus
mentions no name, this proof was also Porphyry's, as van Pescb
suggests*.
T w o other references to Porphyry found in Proclus cannot have
anything to do with commentaries on the Elements.
In the first a
work called the 'Zvp.p.iKTa is quoted, while in the second a philo­
sophical question is raised.
III. Pappus.
The references to Pappus in Proclus are not numerous; but we
have other evidence that he wrote a commentary on the Elements.
Thus a scholiast on the definitions of the Data uses the phrase " as
1

4

1

Proclus, pp. 297, 1—298, 10.
' ibid. p. 352, 13, 14 and the pages preceding.
Fihrist (tr. Suter), p. 9, 10 and p. 45 (note 5).
Van Pesch, De Procli fontibus,
pp. 129, 130. Heiberg assigned them as above in his
Euklid-Studien
(p. 160), but seems to have changed his view later. (See Besthorn-Heiberg,
8

4

Codex
5

Leidensis,

p. 93, note 2.)

Van Pesch, op. cit. pp. 130—\.

