Pappus says at the beginning of his (commentary) on the 10th (book)
of Euclid ." Again in the Fihrist we are told that Pappus wrote a
commentary to the tenth book of Euclid in two parts*. Fragments
of this still survive in a MS. described by Woepcke*, Paris. No. 952. 2
(supplement arabe de la Bibliotheque impeViale), which contains a
translation by Abu 'Uthman (beginning of 10th century) of a Greek
commentary on Book x. It is in two books, and there can now be
no doubt that the author of the Greek commentary was Pappus*.
Again Eutocius, in his note on Archimedes, On the Sphere and
Cylinder I. 13, says that Pappus explained in his commentary on the
Elements how to inscribe in a circle a polygon similar to a polygon
inscribed in another circle; and this would presumably come in his
commentary on Book XII., just as the problem is solved in the second
scholium on Eucl. XII. I. Thus Pappus' commentary on the Elements
must have been pretty complete, an additional confirmation of this
supposition being forthcoming in the reference of Marinus (a pupil
and follower of Proclus) in his preface to the Data to " the com­
mentaries of Pappus on the book ."
The actual references to Pappus in Proclus are as follows:
(1) On the Postulate (4) that all right angles are equal, Pappus is
quoted as saying that the converse, viz. that all angles equal to a
right angle are right, is not true , since the angle included between
the arcs of two semicircles which are equal, and have their diameters
at right angles and terminating at one point, is equal to a right angle,
but is not a right angle.
(2) On the axioms Pappus is quoted as saying that, in addition to
Euclid's axioms, others are on record as well (crvvavaypdcpecrdai) about
unequals added to equals and equals added to unequals'; these, says
Proclus, follow from the Euclidean axioms, while others given by
Pappus are involved by the definitions, namely those which assert
that " all parts of the plane and of the straight line coincide with one
another," that " a point divides a straight line, a line a surface, and a
surface a solid," and that " the infinite is (obtained) in magnitudes
both by addition and diminution ."
1

8

6

8

1

Euclid's Data,

* Mhnoires

ed. Menge, p. 262.

priscntls

a Facademie

* Fihrist

des sciences,

1856,

(tr. Suter), p. 1 3 .

XIV. pp.

658—719.

* Woepcke read the name of the author, in the title of the first book, as B . los (the dot
representing a missing vowel). He quotes also from other MSS. (e.g. of the Ta'rikh
at'
Hukamli
and of the Fihrist) where he reads the name of the commentator as B.lis,
B.n.s
or B . l.s.
Woepcke takes this author to be Valens, and thinks it possible that he may be
the same as the astrologer Vettius Valens. This Heiberg (Euklid-Studien,
pp. 169, 170)
proves to be impossible, because, while one of the MSS. quoted by Woepcke says that
"B.n.s,
le Ro&mi"
(late-Greek) was later than Claudius Ptolemy and the Fihrist
says
B.
l.s, le Rodmi"
wrote a commentary on Ptolemy's Planisphaerium,
Vettius Valens
seems to have lived under Hadrian, and must therefore have been an elder contemporary of
Ptolemy. But Suter shows (Fihrist,
p. 22 and p. 54, note 92) that Bancs is only distin­
guished from Babes by the position of a certain dot, and Bales may also easily have arisen
from an original Babos (there is no P in Arabic), so that Pappus must be the person meant.
This is further confirmed by the fact that the Fihrist
gives this author and Valens as the
subjects of two separate paragraphs, attributing to the latter astrological works only.
Heiberg, Euklid-Studien,
p. 1 7 3 ; Euclid's Data, ed. Menge, pp. 256, lii.
Proclus, pp. 189, 190.
ibid. p. 197, 6—10.
11

8
6

8

7

ibid.

p. 198,

3—15.

