INTRODUCTION

[CH.

Ill

(3)

Pappus gave a pretty proof of I. 5. This proof has, I think,
on this point see my note on the
proposition.
(4) On I. 47 Proclus s a y s : " A s the proof of the writer of the
Elements is manifest, I think that it is not necessary to add anything
further, but that what has been said is sufficient, since indeed those
who have added more, like Heron and Pappus, were obliged to make
use of what is proved in the sixth book, without attaining any
important result." W e shall see what Heron's addition consisted of;
what Pappus may have added we do not know, unless it was some­
thing on the lines of his extension of I. 47 found in the Synagoge
(IV. p. 176, ed. Hultsch).
We may fairly conclude, with van Pesch , that Pappus is drawn
upon in various other passages of Proclus where he quotes no
authority, but where the subject-matter reminds us of other notes
expressly assigned to Pappus or of what we otherwise know to have
been favourite questions with him. Thus :
1. W e are reminded of the curvilineal angle which is equal to but
not a right angle by the note on I. 32 to the effect that the converse
(that a figure with its interior angles together equal to two right
angles is a triangle) is not true unless we confine ourselves to
rectilineal figures. This statement is supported by reference to a
figure formed by four semicircles whose diameters form a square, and
one of which is turned inwards while the others are turned outwards.
The figure forms two angles "equal t o " right angles in the sense
described by Pappus on Post. 4, while the other curvilineal angles are
not considered to be angles at all, and are left out in summing the
internal angles. Similarly the allusions in the notes on I. 4, 23 to
curvilineal angles of which certain moon-shaped angles (/j,r]voeiSeU)
are shown to be "equal t o " rectilineal angles savour of Pappus.
2. On I. 9 Proclus s a y s that " Others, starting from the Archi­
medean spirals, divided any given rectilineal angle in any given ratio."
W e cannot but compare this with Pappus IV. p. 286, where the spiral
is so used ; hence this note, including remarks immediately preceding
about the conchoid and the quadratrix, which were used for the same
purpose, may very well be due to Pappus.
3. The subject of isoperimetric figures was a favourite one with
Pappus, who wrote a recension of Zenodorus' treatise on the subject .
Now on I. 35 Proclus speaks about the paradox of parallelograms
having equal area (between the same parallels) though the two sides
between the parallels may be of any length, adding that of parallelo­
grams with equal perimeter the rectangle is greatest if the base be
given, and the square greatest if the base be not given etc.
He
returns to the subject on I. 37 about triangles . Compare also his
note on I. 4. These notes may have been taken from Pappus.

been wrongly understood;

1

8

8

1

5

5

7

1

Proclus, p. 419, 9 — 1 5 .
Van Pesch, De Prodi fontibus,
p. 134 sqq.
Proclus, p. 272, 10.
Pappus, V. pp. 304—350 ; for Zenodorus' own treatise see Hultsch's Appendix, pp. 1189
—tfltti
2

8

4

5

Proclus, pp. 396—8.

8

ibid. pp. 403—4.

7

ibid. pp. 236—7.

