4. Again, on I. 21, Proclus remarks on the paradox that straight
lines may be drawn from the base to a point within a triangle which
are (1) together greater than the two sides, and (2) include a less
angle, provided that the straight lines may be drawn from points in
the base other than its extremities. T h e subject of straight lines
satisfying condition (1) was treated at length, with reference to a
variety of cases, by Pappus , after a collection of " p a r a d o x e s " by
Erycinus, of whom nothing more is known. Proclus gives Pappus'
first case, and adds a rather useless proof of the possibility of drawing
straight lines satisfying condition (2) alone, adding that " the proposi­
tion stated has been proved by me without using the parallels of
the commentators ."
By " the commentators " Pappus is doubtless
meant.
5. Lastly, the "four-sided triangle," called by Zenodorus the
" hollow-angled,"' is mentioned in the notes on I. Def. 24—29 and
I. 21. A s Pappus wrote on Zenodorus' work in which the term
occurred , Pappus may be responsible for these notes.
IV.
Simplicius.
According to the Fihrist', Simplicius the Greek wrote " a com­
mentary to the beginning of Euclid's book, which forms an introduc­
tion to geometry." And in fact this commentary on the definitions,
postulates and axioms (including the postulate known as the ParallelAxiom) is preserved in the Arabic commentary of an-Nairizi'. On
two subjects this commentary of Simplicius quotes a certain " A g a n i s , "
the first subject being the definition of an angle, and the second the
definition of parallels and the parallel-postulate.
Simplicius gives
word for word, in a long passage placed by an-Nairizi after I. 29, an
attempt by " Aganis " to prove the parallel-postulate. It starts from
a definition of parallels which agrees with Geminus' view of them as
given by Proclus , and is closely connected with the definition given
by Posidonius . Hence it has been assumed that " Aganis " is none
other than Geminus, and the historical importance of the commentary
of Simplicius has been judged accordingly. But it has been recently
shown by Tannery that the identification of " A g a n i s " with Geminus
is practically impossible". In the translation of Besthorn-Heiberg
Aganis is called by Simplicius in one place " philosophus Aganis," in
another " magister noster Aganis," in Gherard's version he is " socius
A g a n i s " and "socius noster Aganis." These expressions seem to
leave no doubt that Aganis was a contemporary and friend, if not
master, of Simplicius ; and it is impossible to suppose that Simplicius
(fl. about 500 A.D.) could have used them of a man who lived four and
1

2

4

7

8

1

2

3

4

Pappus, III. pp. 104—130.
Proclus, p. 328, 1 5 .
Proclus, p. 165, 2 4 ; cf. pp. 328, 329.
See Pappus, ed. Hultsch, pp. 1154, i2p6.
Fihrist
(tr. Suter), p. 2 1 .
" An-Nairizi, ed. Besthorn-Heiberg, pp. 9—41, 119—133, ed. Curtze, pp. 1—37,65—73.
The Codex Leidcnsis,
from which Besthorn and Heiberg's edition is taken, has unfortunately
lost some leaves, so that there is a gap from Def. 1 to Def. 23 (parallels). The loss is, how­
ever, made good by Curtze's edition of the translation by Gherard of Cremona.
Proclus, p. 177, I I .
ibid. p. 176, 7.
5

7

0

8

Bibliotheca

Mathematica,

II ,
t

1900,

pp.

9—11.

