EXCURSUS

I.

PYTHAGORAS A N D T H E PYTHAGOREANS.
T h e problem of determining how much of the Pythagorean discoveries in
mathematics can be attributed to Pythagoras himself is not only difficult; it
may be said to be insoluble. Tradition on the subject is very meagre and
uncertain, and further doubt is thrown upon it by the well-known tendency of
the later Pythagoreans to ascribe everything to the Master himself ( a i r o s ?<pa,
Ipse dixit). Pythagoras himself left no written exposition of his doctrines, nor
did any of his immediate successors, not even Hippasus, about whom the
different stories ran ( i ) that he was expelled from the school because he pub­
lished doctrines of Pythagoras, and (2) that he was drowned at sea for revealing
the construction of the dodecahedron in the sphere and claiming it as his own,
or (as others have it) for making known the discovery of the irrational or in­
commensurable. Nor is the absence of any written record of Pythagorean
doctrines down to the time of Philolaus to be put down to a pledge of secrecy
binding the school; at all events this did not apply to their mathematics or
their physics; and it may be that the supposed secrecy was invented to
account for the absence of documents. T h e fact seems to be that oral com­
munication was the tradition of the school, while their doctrines would in the
main be too abstruse to be understood by the generality of people outside.
Even Aristotle felt the difficulty; he evidently knew nothing for certain about
any ethical or physical doctrines going back to Pythagoras himself; when he
speaks of the Pythagorean system, he always refers it to " the Pythagoreans."
sometimes even to " the so-called Pythagoreans."
Since my note on Eucl. I. 47 was originally written the part of Pythagoras
in the Pythagorean mathematical discoveries has been further discussed and
every scrap of evidence closely, and even meticulously, examined in two long
articles by Heinrich Vogt, " Die Geometrie des Pythagoras" (Bib/iotheca
Mathematica i x , 1908/9, pp. 15—54) and " D i e Entstehungsgeschichte des
Irrationalen nach Plato und anderen Quellen des 4. Jahrhunderts" (Bibliotheca Mathematica x , 1910, pp. 9 7 — 1 5 5 ) . T h e s e papers would not indeed
have enabled me to modify greatly what I have written regarding the supposed
discoveries of Pythagoras and the early Pythagoreans, because 1 have through­
out been careful to give the traditions on the subject for what they are worth
and no more, and not to build too much upon them. It is right however to
give, in a separate note, a few details of Vogt's arguments.
G . Junge had, in his paper " W a n n haben die Griechen das Irrationale
e n t d e c k t ? " mentioned above (p. 3 5 1 ) , tried to prove that Pythagoras himself
could not have discovered the irrational; and the object of Vogt's papers is to
go further on the same lines and to show ( 1 ) that it was only the later
Pythagoreans who (before 410 B.C.) recognised the incommensurability of
the diagonal with the side of a square, (2) that the theory of the irrational was
first discovered by Theodorus, to whom Plato refers (Theaetetus 147 D), and
(3) that Pythagoras himself could not have been the discoverer of any one of
s

8

