the things specifically attributed to him, namely (a) the theorem of Eucl. I. 47,
(b) the construction of the five regular solids in the sense in which they are
respectively constructed in Eucl. x i i i , (c) the application of an area in its
widest sense, equivalent to the solution of a quadratic equation in its most
general form.
Vogt's main argument as regards (a) the theorem of 1. 47 is based on a
new translation which he gives of the well-known passage of Proclus' note on
the proposition (p. 426, 6—9), Twv piv laTopelv
TO. dp^ala fiovkopivwv OKOVOVTOLS
TO Oewp-qpa TOVTO €ts Ilv&iyopai' dvairtpirovTwv
icrrlv evpciv Kal fiovOvTTjv k e y o v T w v
airov
«rl tt} tvpeo-ti.
V o g t translates this as follows: " Unter denen, welche
das Altertum erforschen wollen, kann man einige finden, welche denen Gehbr
geben, die dieses Theorem auf Pythagoras zuruckfuhren und ihn als Stieropferer bei dieser Gelegenheit bezeichnen," " Among those who have a taste
for research into antiquity, we can find some who give ear to those who refer
this theorem to Pythagoras and describe him as sacrificing an ox on the
strength of the discovery." According to this version the words
TWV...
jiovkopAvwv and the words dva.Trtp.irovTiav...Ka\...kiy6vT<i>v
refer respectively to
two different sets of persons, in fact two different generations; trie latter are
older authorities who are supposed to be cited by the former ; the former are
a later generation, perhaps contemporaries of Proclus, some of whom accepted
the view of the older authorities while others did not. But this would have
required the article TWV before dvairepirovrwv,
or some such expression as
dk\oiv TIVWV o? dva.irip.irovo'i
instead of dvairtpirovTwv.
Vogt's interpretation is
therefore quite inadmissible. T h e persons denoted by dvairipirovTuiv are some
of the persons denoted by TWV
fiovkopevwv;
hence Tannery's translation, to
which mine (p. 350 above) is equivalent, is the only possible one, namely
" S i Ton ecoute ceux qui veulent raconter l'histoire des anciens temps, on
peut en trouver qui attribuent ce theoreme a Pythagore et lui font sacrifier un
boeufapressa decouverte" (La Giomitrie grecque, p. 103). aKoiWrat agrees
with the assumed subject of tipax; dvarrepirdvTwv
and k t y o v r w v should, strictly
speaking, have been d v a i r i p i r o v r a i and Xcyon-as agreeing with TWO? (the direct
object of t-ipttv) understood, but are simply attracted into the case of /3ovk o p c v w v ; the construction is quite intelligible. I agree with Vogt that
Eudemus' history contained nothing attributing the theorem to Pythagoras.
T h e words of Proclus imply this; but I do not think that they imply (as
V o g t maintains) any pronouncement by Proclus himself against such attribution.
In my opinion, Proclus is simply determined not to commit himself to any
v i e w ; his way of evading a decision is the sentence following, iyw Si Oavpdfa
piv Kal Tois irpoirous eirio-TaiTas TT} TO«8« TOC Ottopyparos dkr)6(Ca, peit,oVois Si
dyapat
rbv aToixeuiynjv...;
the plural TOI)S 7rparrovs eiritrTavTa? is, I hold, used for the

very purpose of making the statement as vague as possible; he will not even
allow it to be inferred that he attributed the discovery to any single person.
Returning to t/ TWV dkoyiav

vpaypaTiio.

(Proclus, p. 65,

19), we may

now

concede (following Diels) that we should read TWV dva. kdyov ("proportionals ")
instead of TCV d k o y w v ("irrationals") and that the author intended to attribute
to Pythagoras a theory of proportion (the arithmetical theory applicable to
commensurable magnitudes only) rather than the theory of irrationals. But
I do not agree in Vogt's contention that the theory of the irrational was first
discovered by Theodorus. It seems to me that we have evidence to the
contrary in the very passage of Plato referred to. Plato (Theaetetus 147 d)
mentions ^ 3 . Ji> ••• P
v 17 as dealt with by Theodorus, but omits J 2 .
T h i s fact, along with Plato's allusions elsewhere to the irrationality of »/ > and
U

t

0

2

