to approximations to it, in the expressions appryros and pr/r^ Sidptrpos 1-175
7re/j.7ra8os, as if those expressions had a well-known signification, implies that
the discovery of the irrationality of J2 had been made before the time of
Theodorus. T h e words rj i w dXoyow irp a y pa re im might well be used even
if the reference is only to J2, because the first step would be the most
difficult, and wpaypartia need not mean the establishment of a complete theory
or anything more than " investigation " of a subject.
Junge and Vogt hold that the theory of the irrational was not discovered
by the early Pythagoreans any more than Pythagoras because, if it had been
so discovered, an impossibly long period would intervene between the investi­
gation of the particular case o f J2 and the extension of the theory by
Theodorus to the cases of J 3, 7 5 etc. But might not this well be due to the
fact that in the meantime the minds of geometers were engrossed by other
problems of importance, namely the quadrature of the circle (Hippocrates of
Chios and his quadratures of lunes), the trisection of any angle (Hippias of Elis
and his curve, afterwards known as the quadratrix), and the doubling of the
cube (reduced by Hippocrates to the problem of finding two mean pro­
portionals in continued proportion between two given straight lines), the last
of which problems, which meant finding geometrically the equivalent o f 7 >
would naturally follow the investigation of J2 ? Now Hippias was probably
born about 460 B . C , while Hippocrates seems to have been in Athens during
a considerable portion of the second half o f the fifth century, perhaps from
about 450 to 430 B.C. Moreover V o g t has to get over the fact that Democritus
(born 470/469 B.C.) wrote a book irtpi dXoymv ypappmv Kal vao-rHv, On irrational
lines and solids (or atoms). This difficulty he seeks to overcome by maintaining
that aXo'ycui' does not here mean " irrational" a t all, but " without r a t i o "
(" verhaltnislos "), in the sense that any two straight lines are "without r a t i o "
because they both contain an infinite number of the indivisible (or atomic)
lines, and therefore their ratio, being of the form 00 /oo, is indeterminate.
But, if these were so, all lines (including commensurable lines) would be
"without a ratio" to one another, whereas the title of Democritus' work
clearly implies that dXoyoi ypappal are a class or classes of lines distinguished
from other lines. T h e fact is that Democritus was too good a mathematician
to have anything to d o with "indivisible lines." T h i s is confirmed by a
scholium to Aristotle's De caelo (p. 469 b 14, Brandis) which implicitly
denies to Democritus any theory o f indivisible lines: " of those who have
maintained the existence of indivisibles, some, as for example Leucippus and
Democritus, believe in indivisible bodies, others, like Xenocrates, in indivisible
lines." Moreover Simplicius tells us that, according to Democritus himself,
even the atoms were, in a mathematical sense, divisible further and in fact
ad infinitum.
2

Coming now to (b) the construction of the cosmic figures, 17' i w Koo-piKw
o-xtparmv oio-Tacni (Proclus, p. 65, 20), I agree with V o g t to the following
extent. It is unlikely that Pythagoras or even the early Pythagoreans " con­
structed " the five regular solids in the sense of a complete theoretical con­
struction such as we find, say, in Eucl. x m . ; and it is possible that Theaetetus
was the first to give these constructions, whether eypauVt in Suidas' notice,
irpcuTOS 8« TO iriWe KaXovpiva artpta. iypaxj/t, means " constructed " Or " wrote
upon." But <niorao-« in the above phrase of Proclus may well mean something
less than the theoretical constructions and proofs of Eucl. x m . ; it may mean,
as Vogt says, simply the " putting together " o f the figures in the same way as
Plato puts them together in the Timaeus, i.e. by bringing a certain number o f

