angles of equilateral triangles and of regular pentagons together at one point.
There is no reason why the early Pythagoreans should not have "constructed "
the five regular solids in this sense; in fact the supposition that they did so
agrees well with what we know of their having put angles of certain regular
figures together round a point (in connexion with the theorem of Eucl. i. 32) and
shown that only three kinds of such angles would fill up the space in one plane
round the point. But I do not agree in the apparent refusal of Vogt to credit
the Pythagoreans with the knowledge of the theoretical construction of the
regular pentagon as we find it in Eucl. iv. 10, n .
I do not know of any
reason for rejecting the evidence of the Scholia iv. Nos. 2 and 4 which say
categorically that " this Book " (Book iv.) and " the whole of the theorems "
in it (including therefore Props. 10, 1 1 ) are discoveries of the Pythagoreans.
A n d the division of a straight line in extreme and mean ratio, on which the
construction of the regular pentagon depends, comes in Eucl. Book 11.
(Prop. 1 1 ) , while we have sufficient grounds for regarding the whole of the
substance of Book 11. as Pythagorean.
I will permit myself one more criticism on Vogt's first paper. I think he
bases too much on the fact that it was left for Oenopides (in the period from,
say, 470 to 450 B.C.) to discover two elementary constructions (with ruler and
compasses only), namely that of a perpendicular to a straight line from an
external point (Eucl. 1. 12), and that of an angle equal to a given rectilineal
angle (Eucl. I. 23). Vogt infers that geometry must have been in a very
rudimentary condition at the time. I do not think this follows; the explana­
tion would seem to be rather that, the restriction of the instruments used
in constructions to the ruler and compasses not having been definitely estab­
lished before the time when Oenopides wrote, it had not previously occurred to
anyone to substitute new constructions based on that principle for others
previously in vogue. In the case of the perpendicular, for example, the con­
struction would no doubt, in earlier days, have been made by means of a set
square.

