BOOK V.
INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
T h e anonymous author of a scholium to Book v. (Euclid, ed. Heiberg,
Vol. v. p. 280), who is perhaps Proclus, tells us that "some say" this Book,
containing the general theory of proportion which is equally applicable to
geometry, arithmetic, music, and all mathematical science, "is the discovery
of Eudoxus, the teacher of Plato." Not that there had been no theory of
proportion developed before his time; on the contrary, it is certain that the
Pythagoreans had worked out such a theory with regard to numbers, by which
must be understood commensurable and even whole numbers (a number
being a "multitude made up of units," as denned in Eucl. vn). Thus we
are told that the Pythagoreans distinguished three sorts of means, the
arithmetic, the geometric and the harmonic mean, the geometric mean
being called proportion (avoAoyta) par excellence; and further Iamblichus
speaks of the "most perfect proportion consisting of four terms and specially
called harmonic" in other words, the proportion

20b

a+b
a

:

—

=

,
6

aTb'- '

which was said to be a discovery of the Babylonians and to have been first
introduced into Greece by Pythagoras (Iamblichus, Comm. on Nicomachus,
p. 118). Now the principle of similitude is one which is presupposed by all
the arts of design from their very beginnings; it was certainly known to the
Egyptians, and it must certainly have been thoroughly familiar to Pythagoras
and his school.
This consideration, together with the evidence of the
employment by him of the geometric proportion, makes it indubitable that the
Pythagoreans used the theory of proportion, in the form in which it was
known to them, i.e. as applicable to commensurables only, in their geometry.
But the discovery, also by the Pythagoreans, of the incommensurable would
of course be seen to render the proofs which depended on the theory of
proportion as then understood inconclusive; as Tannery observes {La
Giomttrie grecque, p. 98), " t h e discovery of incommensurability must have
caused a veritable logical scandal in geometry and, in order to avoid it, they
were obliged to restrict as far as possible the use of the principle of similitude,
pending the discovery of a means of establishing it on the basis of a theory of
proportion independent of commensurability." T h e glory of the latter dis­
covery belongs then most probably to Eudoxus. Certain it is that the com­
plete theory was already familiar to Aristotle, as we shall see later.

