B O O K

X.

•

INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
We have seen (Vol. t., p. 351 etc.) that the discovery of the irrational is
due to the Pythagoreans. The first scholium on Book x. of the Elements
states that the Pythagoreans were the first to address themselves to the in­
vestigation of commensurability, having discovered it by means of their obser­
vation of numbeis. They discovered, the scholium continues, that not all
magnitudes have a common measure. " They called all magnitudes measureable by the same measure commensurable, but those which are not subject to
the same measure incommensurable, and again such of these as are measured
by some other common measure commensurable with one another, and such
as are not, incommensurable with the others. And thus by assuming their
measures they referred everything to different commensurabilities, but, though
they were different, even so (they proved that) not all magnitudes are com­
mensurable with any. (They showed that) all magnitudes can be rational
(pjjTa) and all irrational (dXoya) in a relative sense (ois irpo% « ) ; hence the
commensurable and the incommensurable would be for them natural (kinds)
(<j>v<T(i), while the rational and irrational would rest on assumption or con­
vention (diva)." The scholium quotes further the legend according to which
" the first of the Pythagoreans who made public the investigation of these
matters perished in a shipwreck," conjecturing that the authors of this story
" perhaps spoke allegorically, hinting that everything irrational and formless
is properly concealed, and, if any soul should rashly invade this region of life
and lay it open, it would be carried away into the sea of becoming and be over­
whelmed by its unresting currents." There would be a reason also for keeping
the discovery of irrationals secret for the time in the fact that it rendered un­
stable so much of the groundwork of geometry as the Pythagoreans had based
upon the imperfect theory of proportions which applied only to numbers. We
have already, after Tannery, referred to the probability that the discovery
of incommensurability must have necessitated a great recasting of the whole
fabric of elementary geometry, pending the discovery of the general theory
of proportion applicable to incommensurable as well as to commensurable
magnitudes.
It seems certain that it was with reference to the length of the diagonal of
a square or the hypotenuse of an isosceles right-angled triangle that the irra­
tional was discovered. Plato (Theaetetus, 147 D) tells us that Theodorus of
Cyrene wrote about square roots ((Swajueis), proving that the square roots of

