three square feet and five square feet are not commensurable with that of one
square foot, and so on, selecting each such square root up to that of 17 square
feet, at which for some reason he stopped. No mention is here made of J2,
doubtless for the reason that its incommensurability had been proved before.
Now we are told that Pythagoras invented a formula for finding right-angled
triangles in rational numbers, and in connexion with this it was inevitable that
the Pythagoreans should investigate the relations between sides and hypo­
tenuse in other right-angled triangles. They would naturally give special
attention to the isosceles right-angled triangle; they would try to measure the
diagonal, would arrive at successive approximations, in rational fractions, to
the value of ^2, and would find that successive efforts to obtain an exact
expression for it failed. It was however an enormous step to conclude that
such exact expression was impossible, and it was this step which the Pytha­
goreans made. We now know that the formation of the side- and diagonalnumbers explained by Theon of Smyrna and others was Pythagorean, and
also that the theorems of Eucl. II. 9, 10 were used by the Pythagoreans in
direct connexion with this method of approximating to the value of ^ 2 . The
very method by which Euclid proves these propositions is itself "an indication
of their connexion with the investigation of J 2, since he uses a figure made
up of two isosceles right-angled triangles.
The actual method by which the Pythagoreans proved the incommensura­
bility of J2 with unity was no doubt that referred to by Aristotle (Anal, prior.
I. 23, 41 a 26—7), a reductio ad absurdum by which it is proved that, if the
diagonal is commensurable with the side, it will follow that the same number
is both odd and even. The proof formerly appeared in the texts of Euclid as
x. 117, but it is undoubtedly an interpolation, and August and Heiberg
accordingly relegate it to an Appendix. It is in substance as follows.
Suppose AC, the diagonal of a square, to be com men- A
B
surable with AB, its side. Let a ; f3 be their ratio expressed
in the smallest numbers.
Then a> f3 and therefore necessarily > 1.
Now
AO : AB* = a* :fP,
and, since
AC =iAB ,
[Eucl. 1. 47]
a* = a/P.
Therefore a is even, and therefore a is even.
Since a : ft is in its lowest terms, it follows that /8 must be odd.
Put
a =2y;
therefore
4 / = 2/?,
or
fP = y\
so that /J , and therefore /}, must be even.
But p was also odd :
which is impossible.
L

1

2

2

2

This proof only enables us to prove the incommensurability of the
diagonal of a square with its side, or of J2 with unity. In order to prove
the incommensurability of the sides of squares, one of which has three times
the area of another, an entirely different procedure is necessary; and we find
in fact that, even a century after Pythagoras' time, it was still necessary to use
separate proofs (as the passage of the Theaetetus shows that Theodorus did)
to establish the incommensurability with unity of ^ 3 , ^ 5 , ... up to ^ 1 7 .

