This fact indicates clearly that the general theorem in Eucl. x. 9 that squares
which have not to one another the ratio of a square number to a square number
have their sides incommensurable in length was not arrived at all at once, but
was, in the manner of the time, developed out of the separate consideration
of special cases (Hankel, p. 103).
The proposition x. 9 of Euclid is definitely ascribed by the scholiast to
Theaetetus. Theaetetus was a pupil of Theodorus, and it would seem clear
that the theorem was not known to Theodorus. Moreover the Platonic
passage itself (Theaet. 147D sqq.) represents the young Theaetetus as striving
after a general conception of what we call a surd. " The idea occurred to
me, seeing that square roots (SiW/mt) appeared to be unlimited in multitude,
to try to arrive at one collective term by which we could designate all these
square roots— I divided number in general into two classes. The number
which can be expressed as equal multiplied by equal (urov 1 0 - 0 x 1 9 ) I likened
to a square in form, and I called it square and equilateral....The intermediate
number, such as three, five, and any number which cannot be expressed as
equal multiplied by equal, but is either less times more or more times less, so
that it is always contained by a greater and less side, I likened to an oblong
figure and called an oblong number Such straight lines then as square the
equilateral and plane number I defined as length (/ITJIW), and such as square
the oblong square roots (oura/u.e«), as not being commensurable with the
others in length but only in the plane areas to which their squares are
equal."
There is further evidence of the contributions of Theaetetus to the theory
of incommensurables in a commentary on Eucl. x. discovered, in an Arabic
translation, by Woepcke (Afimoires prhentis a IAcademic des Sciences, xiv.,
1856, pp. 658—720). It is certain that this commentary is of Greek origin.
Woepcke conjectures that it was by Vettius Valens, an astronomer, apparently
of Antioch, and a contemporary of Claudius Ptolemy (2nd cent. A.D.).
Heiberg, with greater probability, thinks that we have here a fragment of the
commentary of Pappus (Euklid-studien, pp. 169—71), and this is rendered
practically certain by Suter (Die Mathematiker und Astronomen der Araber
und ihre Werke, pp. 49 and 211). This commentary states that the theory
of irrational magnitudes " had its origin in the school of Pythagoras. It was
considerably developed by Theaetetus the Athenian, who gave proof, in this
part of mathematics, as in others, of ability which has been justly admired.
He was one of the most happily endowed of men, and gave himself up, with a
fine enthusiasm, to the investigation of the truths contained in these sciences,
as Plato bears witness for him in the work which he called after his name. As
for the exact distinctions of the above-named magnitudes and the rigorous
demonstrations of the propositions to which this theory gives rise, I believe
that they were chiefly established by this mathematician; and, later, the
great Apollonius, whose genius touched the highest point of excellence in
mathematics, added to these discoveries a number of remarkable theories
after many efforts and much labour.
" For Theaetetus had distinguished square roots [puissances must be the
Svra/uit of the Platonic passage] commensurable in length from those which
are incommensurable, and had divided the well-known species of irrational
lines after the different means, assigning the medial to geometry, the binomial
to arithmetic, and the apotome to harmony, as is stated by Eudemus the
Peripatetic.
" As for Euclid, he set himself to give rigorous rules, which he established,

