relative to commensurability and incommensurability in general; he made
precise the definitions and the distinctions between rational and irrational
magnitudes, he set out a great number of orders of irrational magnitudes, and
finally he clearly showed their whole extent."
The allusion in the last words must apparently be to x. 115, where it is
proved that from the medial straight line an unlimited number of other
irrationals can be derived, all different from it and from one another.
The connexion between the medial straight line and the geometric mean
is obvious, because it is in fact the mean proportional between two rational
straight lines "commensurable in square only." Since %(x +y) is the arithmetic
mean between x, y, the reference to it of the binomial can be understood.
The connexion between the apotome and the harmonic mean is explained by
some propositions in the second book of the Arabic commentary. The
harmonic mean between x, y is

>

a n

d propositions of which Woepcke

quotes the enunciations prove that, if a rational or a medial area has for one
of its sides a binomial straight line, the other side will be an apotome of corre­
sponding order (these propositions are generalised from Eucl. x. i n — 4 ) ; the
fact is that —3L =
. (x -y).
x+y
xr—jr
One other predecessor of Euclid appears to have written on irrationals,
though we know no more of the work than its title as handed down by
Diogenes Laertius . According to this tradition, Democritus wrote irtpl
a\6yutv ypa/i/iuiv Kai vacrriov fit, two Books on irrational straight lines and
solids (or atoms'). Hultsch (Neue Jahrbiicher fur Philologie und Padagogik,
1881, pp. 578—9) conjectures that the true reading may be vipl iXoymv
ypap\p.£v KAaoruv, "on irrational broken lines." Hultsch seems to have
in mind straight lines divided into two parts one of which is rational
and the other irrational (" Aus einer Art von Umkehr des Pythagoreischen
Lehrsatzes iiber das rechtwinklige Dreieck gieng zunachst mit Leichtigkeit
hervor, dass man eine Linie construiren konne, welche als irrational zu
bezeichnen ist, aber durch Brechung sich darstellerf lasst als die Summe
einer rationalen und einer irrationalen Linie"). But I doubt the use of (cAao-Tds
in the sense of breaking one straight line into parts; it should properly mean
a bent line, i.e. two straight lines forming an angle or broken short off at their
point of meeting. It is also to be observed that vaorov is quoted as a
Democritean word (opposite to KIVOV) in a fragment of Aristotle (202). I see
therefore no reason for questioning the correctness of the title of Democritus'
book as above quoted .
I will here quote a valuable remark of Zeuthen's relating to the classifi­
cation of irrationals. He says (Geschichte der Mathematik im Altertum und
Mittelalter, p. 56) "Since such roots of equations of the second degree as are
incommensurable with the given magnitudes cannot be expressed by means
of the latter and of numbers, it is conceivable that the Greeks, in exact
investigations, introduced no approximate values but worked on with the
magnitudes they had found, which were represented by straight lines obtained
by the construction corresponding to the solution of the equation. That is
exactly the same thing which happens when we do not evaluate roots but content
ourselves with expressing them by radical signs and other algebraical symbols.
But, inasmuch as one straight line looks like another, the Greeks did not get
1

2

1

Diog. Laert. IX. 47, p. 139 (ed. Cobet).

2

Cf. ante, V o l . I., p. 413.

