The above facts and formulae admit of being stated in a great variety of
ways according to the notation and the particular letters used. Consequently
the summaries which have been given of Eucl. x. by various writers differ
much in appearance while expressing the same thing in substance. The first
summary in algebraical form (and a very elaborate one) seems to have been
that of Cossali (Origine, trasporto in Italia, primi progressi in essa delr Algebra, Vol. n., pp. 242—65) who takes credit accordingly (p. 265). In
1794 Meier Hirsch published at Berlin an Algebraischer Commentar Uber das
zehente Buck der Elemente des Euklides which gives the contents in algebraical
form but fails to give any indication of Euclid's methods, using modern forms
of proof only. In 1834 Poselger wrote a paper, Ueber das zehnte Buck der
Elemente des Euklides, in which he pointed out the defects of Hirsch's repro­
duction and gave a summary of his own, which however, though nearer to
Euclid's form, is difficult to follow in consequence of an elaborate system of
abbreviations, and is open to the objection that it is not algebraical enough
to enable the character of Euclid's irrationals to be seen at a glance. Other
summaries will be found (1) in Nesselmann, Die Algebra der Griechen,
pp. 165—84; (2) in Loria, Le scienze esatte nelf antica Grecia, 1914,
pp. 2 2 1 — 3 4 ; (3) in Christensen's article "Ueber Gleichungen vierten Grades
im zehnten Buch der Elemente Euklids" in the Zeitschrift fiir Math. u.
Physik (Historisch-litterarische Abtheilung), xxxiv. (1889), pp. 201—17. The
only summary in English that I know is that in the Penny Cyclopaedia, under
" Irrational quantity," by De Morgan, who yielded to none in his admiration of
Book x. " Euclid investigates," says De Morgan, " every possible variety of
lines which can be represented by J(Ja ± jb), a and b representing two
commensurable lines....This book has a completeness which none of the
others (not even the fifth) can boast of: and we could almost suspect that
Euclid, having arranged his materials in his own mind, and having completely
elaborated the 10th Book, wrote the preceding books after it and did not live
to revise them thoroughly."
Much attention was given to Book x. by the early algebraists. Thus
Leonardo of Pisa (fl. about 1200A.D.) wrote in the 14th section of his Liber
Abaci on the theory of irrationalities (de tractatu binomiorum et recisorum),
without however (except in treating of irrational trinomials and cubic irra­
tionalities) adding much to the substance of Book x.; and, in investigating
the equation
«*+ 2.2?+ ioa;= 20,
propounded by Johannes of Palermo, he proved that none of the irrationals
in Eucl. x. would satisfy it (Hankel, pp. 344—6, Cantor, n„ p. 43). Luca
Paciuolo (about 1445—1514 A.D.) in his algebra based himself largely, as he
himself expressly says, on Euclid x. (Cantor, II,, p. 293). Michael Stifel
(i486 or 1487 to 1567) wrote on irrational numbers in the second Book of
his Arithmetica Integra, which Book may be regarded, says Cantor (iij, p. 402),
as an elucidation of Eucl. x. The works of Cardano (1501—76) abound in
speculations regarding the irrationals of Euclid, as may be seen by reference to
Cossali (Vol. 11., especially pp. 268—78 and 382—99); the character of
the various odd and even powers of the binomials and apotomes is therein
investigated, and Cardano considers in detail of what particular forms of equa­
tions, quadratic, cubic, and biquadratic, each class of Euclidean irrationals can
be roots. Simon Stevin (1548—1620) gave an Appendice des incommensurables
grandeurs en laquelle est sommairement diclari le contenu du Dixiesme Livre
d'Euclide (Oeuvres math/matiques, Leyde, 1634, pp. 218-22); he speaks thus

