of the book: " La difficulte du dixiesme Livre d'Euclide est a plusieurs
devenue en horreur, voire jusque a l'appeler la croix des mathematiciens,
matiere trop dure a digerer, et en la quelle n'apercoivent aucune utilite," a
passage quoted by Loria (op. cit., p. 222).
It will naturally be asked, what use did the Greek geometers actually
make of the theory of irrationals developed at such length in Book x. ? The
answer is that Euclid himself, in Book xin., makes considerable use of the
second portion of Book x. dealing with the irrationals affected with a negative
sign, the apotomes etc. One object of Book XIu. is to investigate the relation
of the sides of a pentagon inscribed in a circle and of an icosahedron and
dodecahedron inscribed in a sphere to the diameter of the circle or sphere
respectively, supposed rational. The connexion with the regular pentagon of
a straight line cut in extreme and mean ratio is well known, and Euclid first
proves (xm. 6) that, if a rational straight line is so divided, the parts are the
irrationals called apotomes, the lesser part being a first apotome. Then, on
the assumption that the diameters of a circle and sphere respectively are
rational, he proves (xiu. 11) that the side of the inscribed regular pentagon is
the irrational straight line called minor, as is also the side of the inscribed
icosahedron (xm. 16), while the side of the inscribed dodecahedron is the
irrational called an apotome (xm. 17).
Of course the investigation in Book x. would not have been complete if
it had dealt only with the irrationals affected with a negative sign. Those
affected with the positive sign, the binomials etc., had also to be discussed,
and we find both portions of Book x., with its nomenclature, made use of by
Pappus in two propositions, of which it may be of interest to give thf enun­
ciations here.
If, says Pappus (iv. p. 178), AS be the rational diameter of a semicircle, and
if AB be produced to C so that BC is equal to the radius, if CD be a tangent,

A

F

B

C

if E be the middle point of the arc BD, and if CE be joined, then CE is the
irrational straight line called minor. As a matter of fact, if 0 is the radius,
CJ? = ?(s-2j3) and

CE-Jt^B.Jsjl^k.

If, again (p. 182), CD be equal to the radius of a semicircle supposed

rational, and if the tangent DB be drawn and the angle ADB be bisected by
DE meeting the circumference in F, then DE is the excess by which the
binomial exceeds the straight line which produces with a rational area a medial

