whole (see Eucl x. 77). (In the figure DK is the binomial and KFlhe other
irrational straight line.) As a matter of fact, if p be the radius,
K D - - P . ^ , ^ K F = P . J ^ = P

(^^M:^EWy

Proclus tells us that Euclid left out, as alien to a selection of elements, the
discussion of the more complicated irrationals, "the unordered irrationals which
Apollonius worked out more fully" (Proclus, p. 74, 23), while the scholiast
to Book x. remarks that Euclid does not deal with all rationals and irrationals
but only the simplest kinds by the combination of which an infinite number
of irrationals are obtained, of which Apollonius also gave some. The author
of the commentary on Book x. found by Woepcke in an Arabic translation,
and above alluded to, also says that "it was Apollonius who, beside the
ordered irrational magnitudes, showed the existence of the unordered and by
accurate methods set forth a great number of them." It can only be vaguely
gathered, from such hints as the commentator proceeds to give, what the
character of the extension of the subject given by Apollonius may have been.
See note at end of Book.
DEFINITIONS.

1. Those magnitudes are said to be c o m m e n s u r a b l e
which are measured by the same measure, and those i n c o m ­
m e n s u r a b l e which cannot have any common measure.
2. Straight lines are c o m m e n s u r a b l e in square when
the squares on them are measured by the same area, and
i n c o m m e n s u r a b l e in square when the squares on them
cannot possibly have any area as a common measure.
3. With these hypotheses, it is proved that there exist
straight lines infinite in multitude which are commensurable
and incommensurable respectively, some in length only, and
others in square also, with an assigned straight line. Let
then the assigned straight line be called rational, and those
straight lines which are commensurable with it, whether in
length and in square or in square only, rational, but those
which are incommensurable with it irrational.
4. And let the square on the assigned straight line be
called rational and those areas which are commensurable
with it rational, but those which are incommensurable with
it irrational, and the straight lines which produce them
irrational, that is, in case the areas are squares, the sides
themselves, but in case they are any other rectilineal figures,
the straight lines on which are described squares equal to
them.

