x. DEFF. 1—3]

DEFINITIONS AND NOTES
DEFINITION

I.

%vpptrpa fjayeOri Xiyerai ra rm a v r u t /xerpw ptrpovptva, atrvpptTpa.
prfitv cv8e^€Tat KOII/OI' ptrpov ytvto~6ai
DEFINITION

11

§€,

cov

2.

Ev#€tat oWd/m avppvrpoi cio-tp, 0x01* r a a 7 r ' a u r w rtrpaytova TU a u r a l x P"?
piTpiJTai, aavpperpoi oe, O T a v TOIS owr* airwf TCTpa-yaii'ois pt)Siv evSt^ijTat \u>piov
w

perpov yevtaOai.
Commensurable in square is in the Greek W / u i o-vpptrpos. In earlier
translations (e.g. Williamson's) Surapci has been translated "in power," but,
as the particular power represented by Swauts in Greek geometry is square,
I have thought it best to use the latter word throughout. It will be observed
that Euclid's expression commensurable in square only (used in Def. 3 and
constantly) corresponds to what Plato makes Theaetetus call a square root
(avvapm) in the sense of a surd. If a is any straight line, a and ajm, or
ajm and ajn (where m, n are integers or arithmetical fractions in their
lowest terms, proper or improper, but not square) are commensurable in square
only. Of course (as explained in the Porism to x. 10) all straight lines
commensurable in length (p^xei), in Euclid's phrase, are commensurable in
square also; but not all straight lines which are commensurable in square are
commensurable in length as well. On the other hand, straight lines incom­
mensurable in square are necessarily incommensurable in length also; but not
all straight lines which are incommensurable in length are incommensurable
in square. In fact, straight lines which are commensurable in square only are
incommensurable in length, but obviously not incommensurable in square.
KOLVOV

DEFINITION

3.

TOUTIBI' vrtOMipiviav o c t K r u x a i , o n
TrpoT€0(ia~r) (iOtia vva.p\ovo-iv (idsiai
TrkyOti aVctpot avpptrpoi T€ K a t do-vpptrpOL a t ptv pqxtl povov, a t o f K a i 8vvdp.fl.
Ka\tio-6v} ovv 17 ph> TrpoTfBtlo'a tiOda pryrq, K a t at TUIJTJ/ trvpptTpoi e t T e pyjKfi K a t
Swdpti e t T € ovvapu povov prjrai, at S« ravrrj drroppfrpot aAoyot Ka\€urB<ao"av.

The first sentence of the definition is decidedly elliptical. It should,
strictly speaking, assert that " with a given straight line there are an infinite
number of straight lines which are (1) commensurable either (a) in square
only or (b) in square and in length also, and (2) incommensurable, either
(a) in length only or (/') in length and in square also."
The relativity of the terms rational and irrational is well brought out in
this definition. We may set out any straight line and call it rational, and it
is then with reference to this assumed rational straight line that others are
called rational or irrational.
We should carefully note that the signification of rational in Euclid is wider
than in our terminology. With him, not only is a straight line commensurable in
length with a rational straight line rational, but a straight line is rational which
is commensurable with a rational straight line in square only. That is, if p is a
rational straight line, not only is — p rational, where m, n are integers and

