mjn in its lowest terms is not square, but

. p is rational also. We should

in this case call ^/ — . p irrational. It would appear that Euclid's termino­
logy here differed as much from that of his predecessors as it does from
ours. We are familiar with the phrase appriTos Bidptrpcn riji irtpirdoos by
which Plato (evidently after the Pythagoreans) describes the diagonal of a
square on a straight line containing 5 units of length. This " inexpressible
diameter of five (squared)" means J$o, in contrast to the prjrq Sidperpm, the
" expressible diameter" of the same square, by which is meant the approxi,
.
/m
mation V 5 0 - 1 , or 7. Thus for Euclid's predecessors v / ^ - P would
apparently not have been rational but appr/Tos, " inexpressible," i.e. irrational.
I shall throughout my notes on this Book denote a rational straight line in
Euclid's sense by p, and by p and o- when two different rational straight lines are
required. Wherever then I use p or <r, it must be remembered that p, a may
have either of the forms a, ^jk. a, where a represents a units of length, a being
either an integer or of the form mjn, where ni, n are both integers, and k is an
integer or of the form mjn (where both m, n are integers) but not square. In
other words, p , o- may have either of the forms a or J A, where A represents
A units of area and A is integral or of the form mjn, where m, n are both
integers. It has been the habit of writers to give a and Ja as the alternative
forms of p , but I shall always use J A for the second in order to keep the
dimensions right, because it must be borne in mind throughout that p is an
irrational straight line.
As Euclid extends the signification of rational (prrros, literally expressible),
so he limits the scope of the term aAoyos (literally having no ratio) as applied
to straight lines. That this limitation was started by himself may perhaps be
inferred from the form of words " let straight lines incommensurable with it
be called irrational." Irrational straight lines then are with Euclid straight lines
commensurable neither in length nor in square with the assumed rational
straight line. Jk. a where k is not square is not irrational; Jk. a is irrational,
and so (as we shall see later on) is (Jk± JX)a.

DEFINITION

4.

K a l TO piv aV6 T^S TrpoiStiorp: (iOtiat T€Todyu>vov pirroV, Kal ra TOUTO)
trvpptrpa prrrd, ra 8c TOVTO) dfrvpptTpa dAoya KaActaPo), Kal at oWaucvat auio
aAoyot, ct piv Tcrpdyttiva clrj, a u r a l at 7rAcvpat, ci &k CTCpd rtea tidvypappa,
at
to-a avrots TCTpdycova dfaypd^owrat.

As applied to areas, the terms rational and irrational have, on the other
hand, the same sense with Euclid as we should attach to them. According
to Euclid, if p is a rational straight line in his sense, p is rational and any
area commensurable with it, i.e. of the form kp (where k is an integer, or of
the form mjn, where m, n are integers), is rational; but any area of the form
Jk. p is irrational. Euclid's rational area thus contains A units of area,
where A is an integer or of the form mjn, where m, n are integers; and his
irrational area is of the form Jk.A. His irrational area is then connected
with his irrational straight line by making the latter the square root of the
s

2

2

