
But it also measures the whole DC •
therefore it will also measure the remainder CG.
But CG measures

FH;

therefore E also measures FH.
But it also measures the whole FA ;
therefore it will also measure the remainder, the unit
though it is a number: which is impossible.

AH,

Therefore no number will measure the numbers AB, CD;
therefore AB, CD are prime to one another.
[vn. Def. 1 2 ]
Q. E. D.


It is proper to remark here that the representation in B o o k s vn. to i x . o f
numbers by straight lines is adopted by Heiberg from the MSS. T h e method
of those editors who substitute points for lines is open to objection because it
practically necessitates, in many cases, the use o f specific numbers, which is
contrary to Euclid's manner.
" L e t CD, measuring BF, leave FA less than itself." T h i s is a neat
abbreviation for saying, measure along BA successive lengths equal to CD
until a point F is reached such that the length FA remaining is less than
CD; in other words, let BF be the largest exact multiple o f CD contained
in BA.
Euclid's method in this proposition is an application to the particular
case o f prime numbers o f the method o f finding the greatest common measure
of two numbers not prime to one another, which we shall find in the next
proposition. With our notation, the method may be shown thus. Supposing
the two numbers to b e a, b, we have, say,
b)a(p

it
C)b(q

?L
d)c(r
rd

I f now a, b are not prime to one another, they must have a common
measure e, where e is some integer, not unity.
And since e measures a, b, it measures a -pb, i.e. e.
Again, since e measures b, c, it measures b - qc, i.e. d,
and lastly, since e measures c, d, it measures c-rd,

i.e. 1:

which is impossible.
Therefore there is no integer, except unity, that measures a, b, which are
accordingly prime to one another.
Observe that Euclid assumes as an axiom that, if a, b are both divisible by
c, so is a - pb.
I n the next proposition he assumes as an axiom that c will in
the case supposed divide a + pb.


