300

BOOK

[vn. 2, 3

VII

Similarly e must measure b - qc, that is, d: which is impossible, since e is
by hypothesis greater than d.
Therefore etc.
Euclid's proposition is thus identical with the algebraical proposition as
generally given, e.g. in Todhunter's algebra, except that o f course Euclid's
numbers are integers.
Nicomachus gives the same rule (though without proving it) when he
shows how to determine whether two given odd numbers are prime or not
prime to one another, and, if they are not prime to one anothei, what is their
common measure. We are, he says, to compare the numbers in turn by
continually taking the less from the greater as many times as possible,
then taking the remainder as many times as possible from the less o f the
original numbers, and so on ; this process " will finish either at an unit or at
some one and the same number," by which it is implied that the division o f a
greater number by a less is done by separate subtractions
of the less. Thus,
with regard to 2 1 and 4 9 , Nicomachus says, " I subtract the less from the
greater; 2 8 is left; then again I subtract from this the same 2 1 (for this is
possible); 7 is left; I subtract this from 2 1 , 1 4 is left; from which I again
subtract 7 (for this is possible); 7 will be left, but 7 cannot be subtracted from
7." T h e last phrase is curious, but the meaning of it is obvious enough, as
also the meaning of the phrase about ending " at one and the same number."
T h e proof of the Porism is of course contained in that part o f the propo­
sition which proves that G, a common measure different from CF, must
measure CF. T h e supposition, thereby proved to be false, that G is greater
than C V d o e s not affect the validity o f the proof that G measures CF in any
case.

PROPOSITION

3.

Given three numbers not prime to one another, to find their
greatest common measure.
Let A, B, C be the three given numbers not prime to
one another;
thus it is required to find the greatest
common measure of A, B, C.
F o r let the greatest common measure,
D, of the two numbers A, B be taken ;
[vn. 2 ]

then D either measures, or does not
measure, C.
First, let it measure it.
But it measures A, B also;
therefore D measures A, B, C;
therefore D is a common measure of A, B, C.
I say that it is also the greatest.

O

El F

