Now, since ^ m e a s u r e s A, B, C,
it also measures A, B ;
therefore it will also measure the greatest common measure
of A, B.
[vn. 2, Por.]
But the greatest common measure of A, B is D ;
therefore F measures D.
And it measures C also ;
therefore F measures D, C;
therefore it will also measure the greatest common measure
of D, C.
[vn. 2, Por.]
But the greatest common measure of D, C is E ;
therefore F measures E, the greater the l e s s : which is
impossible.
Therefore no number which is greater than E will measure
the numbers A, B, C;
therefore E is the greatest common measure of A, B, C.
Q. E. D.

Euclid's proof is here longer than we should make it because he
distinguishes two cases, the simpler of which is really included in the other.
Having taken the greatest common measure, say d, of a, b, two of the
three given numbers a, b, c, he distinguishes the cases
(1) in which d measures c,
(2) in which d does not measure c.
In the first case the greatest common measure of d, c is d itself; in the
second case it has to be found by a repetition of the process of v n . 2. In
either case the greatest common measure of a, b, c is the greatest common
measure of d, c.
But, after disposing of the simpler case, Euclid thinks it necessary to
prove that, if d does not measure c, d and c must necessarily have a greatest
common measure. This he does by means of the original hypothesis that
a, b, c are not prime to one another. Since they are not prime to one another,
they must have a common measure; any common measure of a, bis a measure
of d, and therefore any common measure of a, b, c is a common measure of
d, c; hence d, c must have a common measure, and are therefore not prime to
one another.
T h e proofs of cases (1) and (2) repeat exactly the same argument as we
saw in VII. 2, and it is proved separately for d in case (1) and e in case (2),
where e is the greatest common measure of d, c,
(a)

that it is a common measure of a, b, c,

(/8)

that it is the greatest common measure.

Heron remarks (an-Nairizi, ed. Curtze, p. 191) that the method does
not only enable us to find the greatest common measure of three numbers;
it can be used to find the greatest common measure of as many numbers


