so that, in addition, whatever parts or part AB
the same parts also, or the same part, is C of F.

is of DE,
[vn. 5, 6}
Q. E. D.


If a = — b and c = —d, then, whatever fraction a is of c, the same fraction
n

n

is b of d.
T o prove this, a is divided into its m parts equal to b\n, and c into its
m parts equal to djn.
Then, by vn. 9, whatever fraction one of the m parts of a is of one of the
m parts of c, the same fraction is n of d.
And, by vn. 5, 6, whatever fraction one of the m parts of a is of one of
the m parts of c, the same fraction is the sum of the parts of a (that is, a) of
the sum of the parts ot c (that is, c).
Whence the result follows.
In the Greek text, after the words " so that, in addition " in the last line
but one, is an additional explanation making the reference to v n . 5, 6 clearer,
as follows: " whatever part or parts A G is of DH, the same part or the
same parts is GB of HE a l s o ;
therefore also, whatever part or parts A G is of DH, the same part or the same
parts is AB of DE also.
[vn. 5, 6]
But it was proved that, whatever part or parts AG is of DH, the same
part or the same parts is C of F z\%a ;
therefore also " etc. as in the last two lines of the text.
Heiberg concludes, on the authority of P, which only has the words in
the margin in a later hand, that they may be attributed to Theon.
PROPOSITION

II.

If, as whole is to whole, so is a number subtracted to a
number subtracted, the remainder will also be to the remainder
as whole to whole.
A s the whole AB is to the whole CD, so let AE subtracted
be to CF subtracted;
I say that the remainder EB is also to the remainder
FD as the whole AB to the whole CD.
Since, as AB is to CD, so is AE to CF,
whatever part or parts AB is of CD, the same part
or the same parts is AE of CF also ;
[vn. Def. 20]
Therefore also the remainder EB is the same
part or parts of FD that AB is of CD.
[vn. 7, 8]
Therefore, as EB is to FD, so is AB to CD. [vn. Def. 20]
Q. E. D.

It will be observed that, in dealing with the proportions in Props. 1 1 — 1 3 ,
Euclid only contemplates the case where the first number is " a part" or
" p a r t s " of the second, while in Prop. 13 he assumes the first to be " a part"


