BOOK

VII

[VII. I I ,

12

or "parts" of the third also; that is, the first number is in all three propositions
assumed to be less than the second, and in Prop. 13 less than the third also.
Y e t the figures in Props. 11 and 13 are inconsistent with these assumptions.
If the facts are taken to correspond to the figures in these propositions, it is
necessary to take account of the other possibilities involved in the definition
of proportion (vn. Def. 20), that the first number may also be a multiple, or
a multiple plus " a part" or " parts " (including once as a multiple in this case),
of each number with which it is compared. T h u s a number of different cases
would have to be considered. T h e remedy is to make the ratio which is in
the lower terms the first ratio, and to invert the ratios, if necessary, in order
to make " a part" or " parts " literally apply.
If
a : b = c : d,
(a > c, b > d)
then
(a-c) :(b-d)
= a :b.
This proposition for numbers corresponds to v. 19 for magnitudes. T h e
enunciation is the same except that the masculine (agreeing with apifyio's)
takes the place of the neuter (agreeing with /xcy«0os).
T h e proof is no more than a combination of the arithmetical definition of
proportion (vn. Def. 20) with the results of v n . 7, 8. T h e language of propor­
tions is turned into the language of fractions by Def. 20 ; the results of v n . 7, 8
are then used and the language retransformed by Def. 20 into the language of
proportions.
PROPOSITION

12.

If there be as many numbers as we please in proportion,
then, as one of the antecedents is to one of the consequents, so
are all the antecedents to all the consequents.
Let A, B, C, D be as many numbers as we please in
proportion, so that,
as A is to B, so is C to D;
I say that, as A is to B, so are A, C to B, D.
For since, as A is to B, so is C to D,
A| B| C
whatever part or parts A is of B, the same part
or parts is C of D also.
[vn. Def. 20]
Therefore also the sum of A, C is the same
part or the same parts of the sum of B, D that A is of B.
[vn. s, 6]

Therefore, as A is to B, so are A, C to B, D. [vn. Def. 20]
If
a : a' = b : b' = c : d m
then each ratio is equal to (a + b + c+ ...) : (a' +b'-tV+ . . . ) .
T h e proposition corresponds to v. 12, and the enunciation is word for word
the same with that of v. 12 except that apifytds takes the place of fUydos.
Again the proof merely connects the arithmetical definition of proportion
( v n . Def. 20) with the results of v u . 5, 6, which are quoted as true for any
number of numbers, and not merely for two numbers as in the enunciations of
v n . 5. 6-

