Again, since, as B is to C, so is E to F,
therefore, alternately,
as B is to E, so is C to F.
But, as B is to E, so is A to Z?;
therefore also, as A is to Z?, so is C to
Therefore, alternately,
as A is to C, so is Z? to F.
If
and

[vn. 13]

[id.]

a : b = d : e,
b : c = e :f,

then,
aequali,
a : c = d :f;
and the same is true however many successive numbers are so related.
T h e proof is simplicity itself.
By v n . 13, alternately,
a : d = b : e,
and
b : e = c : f.
Therefore
a : d = c :f
and, again alternately,
a : c = d :/.
Observe that this simple method cannot be used to prove the corresponding
proposition for magnitudes, v. 22, although v. 22 has been preceded by the
two propositions in that Book corresponding to the propositions used here,
viz. v. 16 and v. 1 1 . T h e reason of this is that this method would only prove
v. 22 for six magnitudes all of the same kind, whereas the magnitudes in v. 22
are not subject to this limitation.
Heiberg remarks in a note on vn. 19 that, while Euclid has proved
several propositions of Book v. over again, by a separate proof, for numbers,
he has neglected to do so in certain cases; e.g., he often uses v. 11 in these pro­
positions of Book vn., v. 9 in v n . 19, v. 7 in the same proposition, and so on.
T h u s Heiberg would apparently suppose Euclid o use v. 11 in the last step
of the present proof (Ratios which are the same with the same ratio are also the
same with one another). I think it preferable to suppose that Euclid regarded
the last step as axiomatic; since, by the definition of proportion, the first
number is the same multiple or the same part or the same parts of the second
that the third is of the fourth: the assumption is no more than an assumption
that the numbers or proper fractions which are respectively equal to the same
number or proper fraction are equal to one another.
Though the proposition is only proved of six numbers, the extension to as
many as we please (as expressed in the enunciation) is obvious.
f

PROPOSITION

I 5.

If an unit measure any number, and another number measure
any other number the same number of times, alternately also,
the unit ivill measure the third number the same number of
times that the second measures the fourth.

