(2)

Since

ad=bc,
ac : ad = ac : be.

But

ac : ad=c

: d,

[vn. 17]

and
ac : bc = a : b.
[vu. i&]
Therefore
a : b = c : d.
A s indicated in the note on v n . 14 above, Heiberg regards Euclid as
basing the inferences contained in the last step of part (1) of this proof and
in the first step of part (2) on the propositions v. 9 and v. 7 respectively,
since he has not proved those propositions separately for numbers in this
Book. I prefer to suppose that he regarded the inferences as obvious and
not needing proof, in view of the definition of numbers which are in pro­
portion. E.g., if ac is the same fraction ( " p a r t " or "parts") of ad that ac is
of be, it is obvious that ad must be equal to be.
Heiberg omits from his text here, and relegates to an Appendix, a
proposition appearing in the manuscripts V , p, <p to the effect that, if three
numbers be proportional, the product of the extremes is equal to the square
of the mean, and conversely. It does not appear in P in the first hand, B has
it in the margin only, and Campanus omits it, remarking that Euclid does
not give the proposition about three proportionals as he does in v i . 17, since
it is easily proved by the proposition just given. Moreover an-Nairizi quotes
the proposition about three proportionals as an observation on v n . 19 probably
due to Heron (who is mentioned by name in the preceding paragraph).

PROPOSITION

20.

The least numbers of those which have the same ratio with
them measure those which Itave the same ratio the same number
of times, the greater the greater and the less the less.
For let CD, EF be the least numbers of those which have
the same ratio with A, B;
I say that CD measures A the same number
of times that EF measures B.
Now CD is not parts of A.
For, if possible, let it be s o ;
therefore EF is also the same parts of B
that CD is of A.
[vn. 13 and Def. 20]
Therefore, as many parts of A as there
are in CD, so many parts of B are there also
in EF.
Let CD be divided into the parts of A, namely CG, GD,
and EF'vcAo the parts of B, namely EH,
HF;
thus the multitude of CG, GD will be equal to the multitude
of EH, HF.

