BOOK VI.
INTRODUCTORY

NOTE.

The theory of proportions has been established in Book v. in a perfectly
general form applicable to all kinds of magnitudes (although the representation
OF magnitudes by straight lines gives it a geometrical appearance); it is now
necessary to apply the theory to the particular case of geometrical investigation.
The only thing still required in order that this may be done is a proof OF the
existence of such a magnitude as bears to any given finite magnitude any
given finite ratio; and this proof is supplied, so far as regards the subject
matter of geometry, by vi. 12 which shows how to construct a fourth pro­
portional to three given straight lines.
A few remarks on the enormous usefulness of the theory of proportions
to geometry will not be out of place. W e have already in Books I. and II.
made acquaintance with one important part of what has been well called
geometrical algebra, the method, namely, of application of areas.
We have
seen that this method, working by the representation of products of two
quantities as rectangles, enables us to solve some particular quadratic equations.
But the limitations of such a method are obvious.
So long as general
quantities are represented by straight lines only, we cannot, if our geometry
is plane, deal with products of more than two such quantities; and, even
by the use of three dimensions, we cannot work with products of more
than three quantities, since no geometrical meaning could be attached to
such a product. This limitation disappears so soon as we can represent any
general quantity, corresponding to what we denote by a letter in algebra, by
a ratio; and this we can do because, on the general theory of proportion
established in Book v., a ratio may be a ratio of two incommensurable
quantities as well as of commensurables. Ratios can be compounded ad
infinitum, and the division of one ratio by another is equally easy, since it is
the same thing as compounding the first ratio with the inverse of the second.
Thus e.g. it is seen at once that the coefficients in a quadratic of the most
general form can be represented by ratios between straight lines, and the
solution by means of Books 1. and n. of problems corresponding to quadratic
equations with particular coefficients can now be extended to cover any
quadratic with real roots. As indicated, we can perform, by composition of
ratios, the operation corresponding to multiplying algebraical quantities, and
this to any extent. We can divide quantities by compounding a ratio with
the inverse of the ratio representing the divisor.
For the addition and
subtraction of quantities we have only to use the geometrical equivalent of
bringing to a common denominator, which is effected by means of the fourth
proportional.

