APPENDIX.
I.

T H E CONTENTS OF T H E SO-CALLED BOOK XIV.
BY HYPSICLES.

This supplement to Euclid's Book xm. is worth reproducing for the sake
not only of the additional theorems proved in it but of the historical notices
contained in the preface and in one or two later passages. Where I translate
literally from the Greek text, I shall use inverted commas; except in such
passages I reproduce the contents in briefer form.
I have already quoted from the Preface (Vol. I. pp. S- -6), but I will
repeat it here.
1

" Basilides of Tyre, O Protarchus, when he came to Alexandria and met
my father, spent the greater part of his sojourn with him on account of the
bond between them due to their common interest in mathematics. And on
one occasion, when looking into the tract written by Apollonius about the
comparison of the dodecahedron and icosahedron inscribed in one and the
same sphere, that is to say, on the question what ratio they bear to one
another, they came to the conclusion that Apollonius' treatment of it in this
book was not correct; accordingly, as I understood from my father, they
proceeded to amend and rewrite it. But I myself afterwards came across
another book published by Apollonius, containing a demonstration of the
matter in question, and I was greatly attracted by his investigation of the
problem. Now the book published by Apollonius is accessible to all; for it
has a large circulation in a form which seems to have been the result of later
careful elaboration.
"For my part, I determined to dedicate to you what "I deem to be
necessary by way of commentary, partly because you will be able, by reason
of your proficiency in all mathematics and particularly in geometry, to pass an
expert judgment upon what I am about to write, and partly because, on
account of your intimacy with my father and your friendly feeling towards
myself, you will lend a kindly ear to my disquisition. But it is time to have
done with the preamble and to begin my treatise itself.
[Prop, i.] " The perpendicular drawn from the centre of any circle to the
side of the pentagon inscribed in the same circle is half the sum of the side of the
hexagon and of the side of the decagon inscribed in the same circle."

