Componendo,
(4AB.BC+AC ):AC
(AB + BCf : AC
or
therefore
(AB + BC) : AC
Componendo,
(AB + BC + AC) : AC
zAB: AC
AB : AC
1

1

1

1

1

EF+ DE ) : DE ,
(DE + EE) : DF ;
(DE + EF) : DF.
(4DE.

1

1

[It 8]

(DE + EF + DE) : DB,
2DE : DF;
DE : DF.

S u m m a r y of results.

If AB be any straight line divided at C in extreme and mean ratio, AC
being the greater segment, and if we have a cube, a dodecahedron and an
icosahedron inscribed in one and the same sphere, then:
(1) (side of cube) : (side of icosahedron) = J (AB + AC ):J (AB + BC );
(2)
(surface of dod.) : (surface of icos.)
1

1

1

1

(3)
and (4)

II.

NOTE ON T H E SO-CALLED " B O O K XV.

The second of the two Books added to the genuine thirteen is also
supplementary to the discussion of the regular solids, but is much inferior
to the first, "Book xiv." Its contents are of less interest and the exposition
leaves much to be desired, being in some places obscure and in others
actually inaccurate. It consists of three portions unequal in length. The
first (Heiberg, Vol. v. pp. 40— 8) shows how to inscribe certain of the
regular solids in certain others, (a) a tetrahedron (" pyramid") in a cube,
(b) an octahedron in a tetrahedron ("pyramid"), (c) an octahedron in a cube,
(d) a cube in an octahedron and (e) a dodecahedron in an icosahedron.
The second portion (pp. 8—50) explains how to calculate the number of
edges and the number of solid angles in the five solids respectively. The
third (pp. 50—66) shows how to determine the angle of inclination between
faces meeting in an edge of any one of the solids. The method is to con­
struct an isosceles triangle with vertical angle equal to the said angle of
inclination; from the middle point of any edge two perpendiculars are drawn
to it, one in each of the two faces intersecting in that edge; these perpen­
diculars (forming an angle which is the inclination of the two faces to one
another) are used to determine the two equal sides of an isosceles triangle,
and the base of the triangle is easily found from the known properties of the
particular solid. The rules for drawing the respective isosceles triangles are
first given all together in general terms (pp. 50—52); and the special interest
of the passage consists in the fact that the rules are attributed to " Isidorus
4

4

