our great teacher." This Isidorus is no doubt Isidorus of Miletus, the
architect of the Church of St Sophia at Constantinople (about 532 a . d . ) ,
whose pupil Eutocius also' was; he is often referred to by Eutocius (Comm.
on Archimedes) as 6 MiA^o-ios fiyxavticbs laiSoyjos yjiertpos SiScurKaXoc. Thus
the third portion of the Book at all events was written by a pupil of Isidorus
in the sixth century. Kluge (De Euclidis elemeniorum libris quifentntur XIV
et XV, Leipzig, 1891) has closely examined the language and style of the
three portions and conjectures that they may be the work of different authors;
the first portion may, he thinks, date from the end of the third century (the
time of Pappus), and the second portion too may be older than the third.
Hultsch however (art. " Eukleides " in Pauly-Wissowa's Real-Encyclopadie der
classischen Altertutnswissenschafl, 1907) does not think his arguments con­
vincing.
It may be worth while to set out the particulars of Isidorus' rules for
constructing isosceles triangles with vertical angles equal respectively to
the angles of inclination between faces meeting in an edge of the several
regular solids. A certain base is taken, and then with its extremities as
centres and a certain other straight line as radius two circles are drawn;
their point of intersection determines the vertex of the particular isosceles
triangle. In the case of the cube the triangle is of course right-angled; in
the other cases the bases and the equal sides are as shown below.
Base of isosceles

triangle

For the tetrahedron

the side of a triangular face

For the octahedron

the diagonal of the square
on one side of a triangular
face
the chord joining two nonconsecutive angular points
of the regular pentagon on
an edge (the " pentagon of
the icosahedron")
the chord joining two nonconsecutive angular points
of a pentagonal face [BC
in the figure of Eucl. x m .
•7l

For the icosahedron

For the dodecahedron

Equal sides of
isosceles triangle
the perpendicular from the
vertex of a triangular face
to its base
ditto

ditto

the perpendicular from the
middle point of the chord
joining two non-consecu­
tive angular points of a
face to the parallel side of
that face [//X in the figure
of E u c l . x m . 17]

