x. i]

PROPOSITION i

IS

And, since GD is greater than HA,
and there has been subtracted, from GD, the half GF,
and, from HA, HK greater than its half,
therefore the remainder Z ^ i s greater than the remainder AK.
But DF is equal to C;
therefore C is also greater than AK.
Therefore AK is less than C.
Therefore there is left of the magnitude AB the magnitude
AK which is less than the lesser magnitude set out, namely C.
Q. E. D.


And the theorem can be similarly proved even if the parts
subtracted be halves.
This proposition will be remembered because it is the lemma required in
Euclid's proof of xn. 2 to the effect that circles are to one another as the
squares on their diameters. Some writers appear to be under the impression
that xn. 2 and the other propositions in Book kit. in which the method of
exhaustion is used are the only places where Euclid makes use of x. 1 ; and it
is commonly remarked that x. 1 might just as well have been deferred till the
beginning of Book xn. Even Cantor (Gesch. d. Math. i , p. 269) remarks
that " Euclid draws no inference from it [x. 1], not even that which we should
more than anything else expect, namely that, if two magnitudes are incom­
mensurable, we can always form a magnitude commensurable with the first
which shall differ from the second magnitude by as little as we please." But,
so far from making no use of x. 1 before xn. 2, Euclid actually uses it in the
very next proposition, x. 2. This being so, as the next note will show, it
follows that, since x. 2 gives the criterion for the incommensurability of two
magnitudes (a very necessary preliminary to the study of incommensurables),
X: 1 comes exactly where it should be.
Euclid uses x. 1 to prove not only XII. 2 but xn. 5 (that pyramids with the
same height and triangular bases are to one another as their bases), by means
of which he proves (xn. 7 and Por.) that any pyramid is a third part of the
prism which has the same base and equal height, and XII. 10 (that any cone
is a third part of the cylinder which has the same base and equal height),
besides other similar propositions. Now xn. 7 Por. and XII. 10 are theorems
specifically attributed to Eudoxus by Archimedes (On the Sphere and Cylinder,
Preface), who says in another place (Quadrature of the Parabola, Preface) that
the first of the two, and the theorem that circles are to one another as the
squares on their diameters, were proved by means of a certain lemma which
he states as follows: "Of unequal lines, unequal surfaces, or unequal solids,
the greater exceeds the less by such a magnitude as is capable, if added
[continually] to itself, of exceeding any magnitude of those which are
comparable with one another," i.e. of magnitudes of the same kind as the
original magnitudes. Archimedes also says (loc. cit.) that the second of
the two theorems which he attributes to Eudoxus (Eucl. xn. 10) was
proved by means of " a lemma similar to the aforesaid." The lemma
stated thus by Archimedes is decidedly different from x. 1, which, however,
Archimedes himself uses several times, while he refers to the use of it
s


