i6

BOOK X

[x. i

in xn. 2 (On the Sphere and Cylinder, I. 6). As I have before suggested
(The Works of Archimedes, p. xlviii), the apparent difficulty caused by the
mention of two lemmas in connexion with the theorem of Eucl. xn. 2 may be
explained by reference to the proof of x. 1. Euclid there takes the lesser
magnitude and says that it is possible, by multiplying it, to make it some time
exceed the greater, and this statement he clearly bases on the 4th definition of
Book v., to the effect that "magnitudes are said to bear a ratio to one another
which can, if multiplied, exceed one another." Since then the smaller
magnitude in x. 1 may be regarded as the difference between some two
unequal magnitudes, it is clear that the lemma stated by Archimedes is in
substance used to prove the lemma in x. 1, which appears to play so much
larger a part in the investigations of quadrature and cubature which have come
down to us.
Besides being employed in Eucl. x. 1, the "Axiom of Archimedes" appears
in Aristotle, who also practically quotes the result of x. 1 itself. Thus he
says, Physics vm. 10, 266 b 2, " By continually adding to a finite (magnitude)
I shall exceed any definite (magnitude), and similarly by'continually subtract­
ing from it I shall arrive at something less than it," and ibid. 111. 7, 207 b 10
"For bisections of a magnitude are endless." It is thus somewhat misleading
to use the term " Archimedes' Axiom" for the " lemma" quoted by him,
since he makes no claim to be the discoverer of it, and it was obviously much
earlier.
Stolz (see G. Vitali in Questioni riguardanti le matematiche elementari, 1.,
pp. 129—30) showed how to prove the so-called Axiom or Postulate of Archi­
medes by means of the Postulate of Dedekind, thus. Suppose the two magni­
tudes to be straight lines. It is required to prove that, given two straight lines,
there always exists a multiple of the smaller which is greater than the other.
Let the straight lines be so placed that they have a common extremity and
the smaller lies along the other on the same side of the common extremity.
If A C be the greater and AB the smaller, we have to prove that there
exists an integral number n such that n. AB> AC.
Suppose that this is not true but that there are some points, like B, not
coincident with the extremity A, and such that, n being any integer however
great, n. AB<.AC; and we have to prove that this assumption leads to an
absurdity.
H
A

M
X

K
Y

B

C

The points of AC may be regarded as distributed into two "parts," namely
(1) points Hiot which there exists no integer n such that n\ AH> AC,
(2) points K for which an integer n does exist such that n. AK> AC.
This division into parts satisfies the conditions for the application of
Dedekind's Postulate, and therefore there exists a point M such that the
points of AM belong to the first part and those of MC to the second part
Take now a point Kon MC such that MY < AM. The middle point (X)
of AY will fall between A and M and will therefore belong to the first part;
but, since there exists an integer « such that n. AY> AC, it follows that
2n. AX> AC: which is contrary to the hypothesis.

