This proposition states the test for incommensurable magnitudes, founded
on the usual operation for finding the greatest common measure. The sign
of the incommensurability of two magnitudes is that this operation never
comes to an end, while the successive remainders become smaller and smaller
until they are less than any assigned magnitude.
Observe that Euclid says " let this process be repeated continually until
there is left some magnitude which is less than E." Here he evidently
assumes that the process will some time produce a remainder less than any
assigned magnitude E. Now this is by no means self-evident, and yet
Heiberg (though so careful to supply references) and Lorenz do not refer to
the basis of the assumption, which is in reality x. i, as Billingsley and
Williamson were shrewd enough to see. The fact is that, if we set off a
smaller magnitude once or oftener along a greater which it does not exactly
measure, until the remainder is less than the smaller magnitude, we take away
from the greater more than its half. Thus, in the figure, FD is more than the
half of CD, and BG more than the half of AB. If we continued the process,
A G marked off along CF as many times as possible would cut off more than
its half; next, more than half A G would be cut off, and so on. Hence along
CD, AB alternately the process would cut off more than half, then more than
half the remainder and so on, so that on both lines we should ultimately
arrive at a remainder less than any assigned length.
The method of finding the greatest common measure exhibited in this
proposition and the next is of course again the same as that which we use and
which may be shown thus :
b)a(p

P±
c)b(q
?£.

d)c(r
rd
T

The proof too is the same as ours, taking just the same form, as shown in the
notes to the similar propositions VH. i, 2 above. In the present case the
hypothesis is that the process never stops, and it is required to prove that a, b
cannot in that case have any common measure, as / For suppose that / is a
common measure, and suppose the process to be continued until the remainder
e, say, is less than / .
Then, since f measures a, b, it measures a - pb, or c.
Since / measures b, c, it measures b-qc, or d; and, since / measures c, d,
it measures c — rd, or e: which is impossible, since e <f.
Euclid assumes as axiomatic that, if/ measures a, b, it measures ma ± nb.
In practice, of course, it is often unnecessary to carry the process far in
order to see that it will never stop, and consequently that the magnitudes are
incommensurable. A good instance is pointed out by Allman (Greek Geometry
from Thales to Euclid, pp. 42, 137—8). Euclid proves in XIII. 5 that, if AB
be cut in extreme and mean ratio at C, and if
DA equal to A C be added, then DB is also cut D
A
0 B
in extreme and mean ratio at A. This is indeed
obvious from the proof of II. n . It follows conversely that, if BD is cut into
extreme and mean ratio at A, and A C, equal to the lesser segment AD, be
subtracted from the greater AB, AB is similarly divided at C. We can then

