PROPOSITION 2

19

mark off from AC a portion equal to CB, and AC will then be similarly
divided, and so on. Now the greater segment in a line thus divided is greater
than half the line, but it follows from xm. 3 that it is less than twice the
lesser segment, i.e. the lesser segment can never be marked off more than
once from the greater. Our process of marking off the lesser segment from the
greater continually is thus exactly that of finding the greatest common measure.
If, therefore, the segments were commensurable, the process would stop. But
it clearly does not; therefore the segments are incommensurable.
Allman expresses the opinion that it was rather in connexion with the line
cut in extreme and mean ratio than with reference to the diagonal and side
of a square that the Pythagoreans discovered the incommensurable. But the
evidence seems to put it beyond doubt that the Pythagoreans did discover
the incommensurability of J2 and devoted much attention to this particular
case. The view of Allman does not therefore commend itself to me, though
it is likely enough that the Pythagoreans were aware of the incommensura­
bility of the segments of a line cut in extreme and mean ratio. At all events
the Pythagoreans could hardly have carried their investigations into the in­
commensurability of the segments of this line very far, since Theaetetus is
said to have made the first classification of irrationals, and to him is also, with
reasonable probability, attributed the substance of the first part of Eucl. xm.,
in the sixth proposition of which occurs the proof that the segments of a
rational straight line cut in extreme and mean ratio are apotomes.
Again, the incommensurability of ^ 2 can be proved by a method
practically equivalent to that of x. 2, and without carrying the process very
far. This method is given in Chrystal's Text­
book of Algebra (1. p. 270). Let d, a be the
diagonal and side respectively of a square
ABCD. Mark off AF along A C equal to a.
Draw FE at right angles to AC meeting BC
in E.
It is easily proved that
BE = EF=FC,
CF=AC-AB
= d-a
(1).
CE=CB- CF =
a-(d-a)
= 2a -d
(2).
Suppose, if possible, that d, a are commensurable. If d, a are both
commensurably expressible in terms of any finite unit, each must be an
integral multiple of a certain finite unit
But from (1) it follows that CF, and from (2) it follows that CE, is an
integral multiple of the same unit.
And CF, CE are the side and diagonal of a square CFEG, the side of
which is less than half the side of the original square. If «„ d, are the side and
diagonal of this square,
a = d-a
)
d — 2a-d ) '
Similarly we can form a square with side a and diagonal d which are less
than half a,, d, respectively, and a , d, must be integral multiples of the same
unit, where
a = d - a,,
l

1

2

s

2

l

t

