This inference, which looks so easy when thus symbolically expressed, was
by no means so easy for Euclid owing to the fact that a, b are straight lines,
and m, n numbers. He has to pass from a : b to a : b by means of vi. 20, Por.
through the duplicate ratio; the square on a is to the square on b in the
duplicate ratio of the corresponding sides a, b. On the other hand, m, n
being numbers, it is vm. n which has to be used to show that mp : n* is the
ratio duplicate of m : n.
Then, in order to establish his result, Euclid assumes that, if two ratios are
equal, the ratios which are their duplicates are also equal. This is nowhere
proved in Euclid, but it is an easy inference from v. 22, as shown in my note
on vi. 22.
The converse has to be established in the same careful way, and Euclid
assumes that ratios the duplicates of which are equal are themselves equal.
This is much more troublesome to prove than the converse; for proofs I refer
to the same note on vi. 22.
The second part of the theorem, deduced by reductio ad absurdum from
the first, requires no remark.
In the Greek text there is an addition to the Porism which Heiberg
brackets as superfluous and not in Euclid's manner. It consists (1) of a sort
of proof, or rather explanation, of the Porism and (2) of a statement and
explanation to the effect that straight lines incommensurable in length are
not necessarily incommensurable in square also, and that straight lines
incommensurable in square are, on the other hand, always incommensurable
in length also.
2

2

The Lemma gives expressions for two numbers which have to one another
the ratio of a square number to a square number. Similar plane numbers
are of the form pm . pn and qm . qn, or mnp and mnq , the ratio of which is
of course the ratio of p* to q .
The converse theorem that, if two numbers have to one another the ratio
of a square number to a square number, the numbers are similar plane
numbers is not, as a matter of fact, proved in the arithmetical Books. It is
the converse of vm. 26 and is used in ix. 10. Heron gave it (see note on
vm. 27 above).
Heiberg however gives strong reason for supposing the Lemma to be an
interpolation. It has reference to the next proposition, x. 10, and, as we shall
see, there are so many objections to x. 10 that it can hardly be accepted as
genuine. Moreover there is no reason why, in the Lemma itself, numbers
which are not similar plane numbers should be brought in as they are.
1

1

1

PROPOSITION

10.

To find two straight lines incommensurable, the one in
length only, and the other in square also, with an assigned
straight line.
Let A be the assigned straight line;
thus it is. required to find two straight lines incommensurable,
the one in length only, and the other in square also, with A.
Let two numbers B, C be set out which have not to one


