another the ratio which a square number has to a square
number, that is, which are not similar plane
numbers ;
A—
and let it be contrived that,
°
as B is to C, so is the square on A to
the square on D
~Z~Z—
—for we have learnt how to do this—
E

[x. 6, Por.]

therefore the square on A is commensurable with the square
on D.
[x. 6]
And, since B has not to C the ratio which a square number
has to a square number,
therefore neither has the square on A to the square on D the
ratio which a square number has to a square number;
therefore A is incommensurable in length with D.
[x. 9]
Let E be taken a mean proportional between A, D;
therefore, as A is to D, so is the square on A to the square
on E.
[v. Def. 9]
But A is incommensurable in length with D;
therefore the square on A is also incommensurable with the
square on E;
[x. n ]
therefore A is incommensurable in square with E.
Therefore two straight lines D, E have been found in­
commensurable, D in length only, and E in square and of
course in length also, with the assigned straight line A.]

Q. E. D.

It would appear as though this proposition was intended to supply a
justification for the statement in x. Def. 3 that it is proved that there are an
infinite number of straight lines (a) incommensurable in length only, or
commensurable in square only, and (/•) incommensurable in square, with any
given straight line.
But in truth the proposition could well be dispensed with; and the
positive objections to its genuineness are considerable.
In the first place, it depends on the following proposition,' x. 1 1 ; for the
last step concludes that, since
a* : y* = a : x,
s

and a, x are incommensurable in length, therefore a , f are incommensurable.
But Euclid never commits the irregularity of proving a theorem by means of
a later one. Gregory sought to get over the difficulty by putting x. 10 after
x. 1 1 ; but of course, if the order were so inverted, the Lemma would still be
in the wrong place.
Further, the expression lpj6B0p.1v yap, "for we have learnt (how to do this),"
is not in Euclid's manner and betrays the hand of a learner (though the same


