PROPOSITION 17

43

But CD is commensurable in length with CD, BF, for
s° CD is equal to BF.
[x. 6]
Therefore BC is also commensurable in length with BF,
CD,
[x. 12]
so that BC is also commensurable in length with the remainder
FD;
[x. 15]
55 therefore the square on BC is greater than the square on A
by the square on a straight line commensurable with BC.
Next, let the square on BC be greater than the square on
A by the square on a straight line commensurable with BC,
let a parallelogram be applied to BC equal to the fourth part
60 of the square on A and deficient by a square figure, and let
it be the rectangle BD, DC.
It is to be proved that BD is commensurable in length
with DC.
With the same construction, we can prove similarly that
65 the square on BC is greater than the square on A by the
square on FD.
But the square on BC is greater than the square on A
by the square on a straight line commensurable with BC.
Therefore BC is commensurable in length with FD,
70 so that BC is also commensurable in length with the remainder,
the sum of BF, DC.
[x. 15]
Bat the sum of BF, DC is commensurable with DC, [x. 6]
so that BC is also commensurable in length with CD ; [x. 12]
and therefore, separando, BD is commensurable in length
75 with DC.
[x. 15]
Therefore etc.
45. After saying literally that "the square on BC is greater than the square on A by the
square on DF," Euclid adds the equivalent expression with S{ivarai in its technical sense,
tj B r apa 777s A fiiifov 56varai TJj AZ. A s this is untranslatable in English except by a
paraphrase in practically the. same words as have preceded, I have not attempted to
reproduce it.

This proposition gives the condition that the roots of the equation in x,
ax-x> = p(=^,

say),

are commensurable with a, or that x is expressible in terms of a and integral
m
numbers, i.e. is of the form — a. No better proof can be found for the fact
n
that Euclid and the Greeks used their solutions of quadratic equations for
numerical problems. On no other assumption could an elaborate discussion
of the conditions of incommensurability of the roots with given lengths or
r

