And, as BD is to BC, so is DA to AC.
Therefore DA is commensurable with AC.
But DA is rational;
therefore AC is also rational.
Therefore etc.

[vi. 1]
[x. n ]

fx. Def. 4]

There is a difficulty in the text of the enunciation of this proposition.
The Greek runs TO VITO piyrwi' prjKti o~vp.p.irpwv KOTO. TWO. rmv irpoaprjpfvtav
Tporrutv ivOtuov irtpit\op.tvov
op6oy(£vwv p-nrov ia-tiv, where the rectangle is
said to be contained by " rational straight lines commensurable in length in
any of the aforesaid ways." Now straight lines can only be commensurable
in length in one way, the degrees of commensurability being commensurability
in length and commensurability in square only. But a straight line may be
rational in two ways in relation to a given rational straight line, since it may
be either commensurable in length, or commensurable in square only, with the
latter. Hence Billingsley takes (cowd n r a riov irpoaprjp.iviM' Tpoiratv with prynSv,
translating " straight lines commensurable in length and rational in any of the
aforesaid ways," and this agrees with the expression in the next proposition
" a straight line once more rational in any of the aforesaid ways"; but the
order of words in the Greek seems to be fatal to this way of translating
the passage.
The best solution of the difficulty seems to be to reject the words "in
any of the aforesaid ways " altogether. They have reference to the Lemma
which immediately precedes and which is itself open to the gravest suspicion.
It is very prolix, and cannot be called necessary; it appears moreover in
connexion with an addition clearly spurious and therefore relegated by
Heiberg to the Appendix. The addition does not even pretend to be Euclid's,
for it begins with the words " for he calls rational straight lines those—"
Hence we should no doubt relegate the Lemma itself to the Appendix.
August does so and leaves out the suspected words in the enunciation, as I
have done.
Exactly the same arguments apply to the I-emma added (without the
heading "Lemma") to x. 23 and the same words "in any of the aforesaid
ways" used with " medial straight lines commensurable in length" in the
enunciation of x. 24. The said Lemma must stand or fall with that now in
question, since it refers to it in terfris: "And in the same way as was explained
in the case of rationals...."
Hence I have bracketed the Lemma added to x. 23 and left out the
objectionable words in the enunciation of x. 24.
If p be one of the given rational straight lines (rational of course in the
sense of x. Def. 3), the other can be denoted by hp, where k is, as usual, of
the form m\n (where m, n are integers). Thus the rectangle is hp*, which is
obviously rational since it is commensurable with p . fx. Def. 4.]
A rational rectangle may have any of the forms ab, ha', kA or A, where
a, b are commensurable with the unit of length, and A with the unit of area.
Since Euclid is not able to use kp as a symbol for a straight line
commensurable in length with p, he has to put his proof in a form corre­
sponding to
p : kp* = p • kp,
whence, p, kp being commensurable, p , hp" are so also.
fx. n ]
2

2

2

