2

2

whence the area
. p (or \Jk . p ) is contained by two rational straight
lines commensurable i n square only, s o that Xk^p (or JX. k^p) is a medial
straight line.
It is in the Porism that we have the first mention of a medial area. It is
the area which is equal to the square o n a medial straight line, an area, there­
fore, of the form ,*V, which is, as a matter of fact, arrived at, though not
named, before the medial straight line itself (x. 21).
The Porism states that A ^ p is a medial area, which is indeed obvious.
2

PROPOSITION

24.

The rectangle contained by medial straight lines commen­
surable in length is medial.
For let the rectangle AC be contained by the medial
straight lines AB, BC which are commensurable
in length ;
I say that AC is medial.
For on AB let the square AD be described;
therefore AD is medial,
.
And, since AB is commensurable in length
with BC,
while AB is equal to BD,
'o
therefore DB is also commensurable in length
with BC;
so that DA is also commensurable with AC.
[vi. 1, x. 11]
But DA is medial;
therefore AC is also medial.
[x. 23, Por.]
0

B

1

Q. E. D.


There is the same difficulty in the text of this enunciation a s in that of
x. 19. The Greek says "medial straight lines commensurable in length in
any of the aforesaid ways "; but straight lines can only be commensurable in
length in one way, though they can be medial in two ways, as explained in the
addition t o the preceding proposition, i.e. they can be either commensurable
in length or commensurable in square only with a given medial straight line.
For the same reason a s that explained in the note on x. 19 I have omitted
" in any of the aforesaid ways " in the enunciation and bracketed the addition
to x. 23 to which it refers.
i*p and Xk^p are medial straight lines commensurable in length. The
rectangle contained by them is
which may be written
and is there­
fore clearly medial.
Euclid's proof proceeds thus. Let x, Xx be the two medial straight lines
commensurable in length.
Therefore
x": x. Xx = x : Xx.


