And, inasmuch as the squares on AB, BC are equal to
twice the rectangle AB, BC together with the square on CA,
7]

therefore the squares on AB, BC are also incommensurable
with the remainder, the square on AC.
[x. 13, 16]
But the squares on AB, BC are rational ;
therefore AC is irrational.
[x. Def. 4]
And let it be called an a p o t o m e .
Q. E. D.

Euclid now passes to the irrational straight lines which are the difference
and not, as before, the sum of two straight lines. Apotome ("portion cut off")
accordingly takes the place of binomial and the other terms follow mutatis
mutandis. The first hexad of propositions (73 to 78) exhibit the six irrational
straight lines which are really the result of extracting the square root of the six
irrationals in the later propositions 85 to 9 0 (or, strictly speaking, of finding
the sides of squares equal to the rectangles formed by each of those six
irrational straight lines respectively with a rational straight line). Thus, just
as in the corresponding propositions about the irrational straight lines formed
by addition, the further removed irrationals, so to speak, come first.
We shall denote the apotome etc. by (x —y), which is formed by subtracting
a certain lesser straight line y from a greater x. In x. 79 and later propositions
y is called by Euclid the annex (17 irpoaapuo&vaa), being the straight line which,
when added to the apotome or other irrational formed by subtraction, makes
up the greater x.
The methods of proof are exactly the same as in the preceding propositions
about the irrational straight lines formed by addition.
In this proposition x, y are rational straight lines commensurable in square
only, and we have to prove that (x -y), the apotome, is irrational.
x ~ - y, so that x w y :
therefore, since
x : y = x- : xy,

x- v xy.
But x? * (x- +_r), and xy « ixy;
therefore
x- +y' ^ 2xy,
whence
(x -y)- ~ (x- +y-).
But (x- +y"-) is rational,
therefore (x -yf, and consequently (x —y), is irrational.
The apotome (x -y) is of the form p - /k. 0, just as the binomial straight
line is of the form p + Ji. p.
s

PROPOSITION

74.

If from a medial straight line there be subtracted a medial
straight line which is commensurable with the whole in square
only, and which contains with the whole a rational rectangle,
the remainder is irrational.
And let it be called a first
a p o t o m e of a m e d i a l straight line.


