But, by ( i ) , this expression is equal to — . 2 Jk, which is rational.
Hence an apotome, which is irrational, is also rational:
which is impossible.
This proposition is the connecting link which enables Euclid to prove that
all the compound irrationals with positive signs above discussed are different
from all the corresponding compound irrationals with negative signs, while the
two sets are all different from one another and from the medial straight line.
T h e recapitulation following makes this clear.

The apotome and the irrational
straight lines following
it
are neither the same with the medial straight line nor with one
another.
For the square on a medial straight line, if applied to a
rational straight line, produces as breadth a straight line
rational and incommensurable in length with that to which it
is applied,
[x. 22]
while the square on an apotome, if applied to a rational
straight line, produces as breadth a first apotome,
[x. 97]
the square on a first apotome of a medial straight line, if
applied to a rational straight line, produces as breadth a
second apotome,
[x. 98]
the square on a second apotome of a medial straight line, if
applied to a rational straight line, produces as breadth a third
apotome,
[x. 99]
the square on a minor straight line, if applied to a rational
straight line, produces as breadth a fourth apotome,
[x. roo]
the square on the straight line which produces with a rational
area a medial whole, if applied to a rational straight line,
produces as breadth a fifth apotome,
[x. 101]
and the square on the straight line which produces with a
medial area a medial whole, if applied to a rational straight
line, produces as breadth a sixth apotome.
[x. 102]
Since then the said breadths differ from the first and from
one another, from the first because it is rational, and from one
another since they are not the same in order,
it is clear that the irrational straight lines themselves also
differ from one another.
And, since the apotome has been proved not to be the
same as the binomial straight line,
.
[x. m ]
but, if applied to a rational straight line, the straight lines

