BOOK

X

but, if neither of the straight lines CD, DB
able,

[X. 112

is so commensur­

neither of the straight lines FK, KE is so ;
so that EE is an apotome, the terms of which FK, KE
are
commensurable with the terms CD, DB
of the binomial
straight line and in the same ratio, and it has the same order
as BC.
Q. E. D.


E. D.

Heiberg considers that this proposition and the succeeding ones are inter­
polated, though the interpolation must have taken place before Theon's time.
His argument is that x . 1 1 2 — 1 1 5 are nowhere used, but that x. i n rounds
off the complete discussion of the 13 irrationals (as indicated in the recapitu­
lation), thereby giving what was necessary for use in connexion with the
investigation of the five regular solids. For besides X. 73 (used in x i n . 6, 11)
x. 94 and 97 are used in XIII. 1 1 , 6 respectively; and Euclid could not have
stopped at x. 97 without leaving the discussion of irrationals imperfect, for
x. 98—102 are closely connected with x. 97,and x. 1 0 3 — m add, as it were,
the coping-stone to the whole doctrine. On the other hand, x. 1 1 2 — 1 1 5 are
not connected with the rest of the treatise on the 13 irrationals and are not
used in the stereometric books. T h e y are rather the germ of a new study and
a more abstruse investigation of irrationals in themselves. Prop. 115 in
particular extends the number of the different kinds of irrationals. A s
however x. 1 1 2 — 1 1 5 are old and serviceable theorems, Heiberg thinks that,
though Euclid did not give them, they may have been taken from Apollonius.
I will only point out what seems to me open to doubt in the above, namely
that x. 1 1 2 — 1 1 4 (excluding 1 1 5 ) are not connected with the rest of the
exposition o f the 13 irrationals. It seems tc me that they are so connected,
x. m has shown us that a binomial straight line cannot also be an apotome.
But x. 1 1 2 — 1 1 4 show us how either of them can be used to rationalise the other,
thus giving what is surely an important relation between them.
x. 112 is the equivalent of rationalising the denominators of the fractions
C*
<*
JA+JB'
a+JB'
by multiplying numerator and denominator by J A — JB and a - JB
respectively.
Euclid proves that

^ 7 7 — = Ap - Jk. Kp (k < 1), and his method enables
p + Jk.p
us to see that K = <r7(p - kp').
T h e proof is a remarkable instance of the dexterity of the Greeks in using
geometry as the equivalent of our algebra. Like so many proofs in Archimedes
and Apollonius, it leaves us completely in the dark as to how it was evolved.
T h a t the Greeks must have had some analytical method which suggested the
steps of such proofs seems certain; but what it was must remain apparently
an insoluble mystery.
I will reproduce by means of algebraical symbols the exact course of
Euclid's proof.
2

H e has to prove that

^

— is an apotome related in a certain way to


