Heiberg is clearly right in holding that this proposition, at all events, is
alien to the general scope of Book x , and is therefore probably an interpola­
tion, made however before Theon's time. It is of the same character as a
scholium at the end of the Book, which is (along with the interpolated proposi­
tion proving, in two ways, the incommensurability of the diagonal of a square
with its side) relegated by August as well as Heiberg to an Appendix.
T h e proposition amounts to this.
T h e straight line k^p being medial, if a be a rational straight line, v k^pa
is a new irrational straight line. So is the mean proportional between this
and another rational straight line a-', and so on indefinitely.
ANCIENT

EXTENSIONS

OF

THE

THEORY

OF

BOOK

X.

From the hints given by the author of the commentary found in Arabic
by Woepcke (cf. pp. 3—4 above) it would seem probable that Apollonius'
extensions of the theory of irrationals took two directions : (1) generalising
the medial straight line of Euclid, and (2) forming compound irrationals by the
addition and subtraction of more than two terms of the sort composing the
binomials, apotomes, eta T h e commentator writes (Woepcke's article, pp. 694
sqq.):
" It is also necessary that we should know that, not only when we join
together two straight lines rational and commensurable in square do we obtain
the binomial straight line, but three or four lines produce in an analogous
manner the same thing. In the first case, we obtain the trinomial straight
line, since the whole line is irrational; and in the second case we obtain the
quadri normal, and so 'on ad infinitum. T h e proof of the (irrationality of the)
line composed of three lines rational and commensurable in square is exactly
the same as the proof relating to the combination of two lines.
" But we must start afresh and remark that not only can we take one sole
medial line between two lines commensurable in square, but we can take three
or four of them and so on ad infinitum, since we can take, between any two
given straight lines, as many lines as we wish in continued proportion.
" Likewise* in the lines formed by addition not only can we construct the
binomial straight line, but we can also construct the trinomial, as well as the
first and second trimedial; and, further, the line composed of three straight
lines incommensurable in square and such that the one of them gives with
each of the two others a sum of squares (which is) rational, while the rectangle
contained by the two lines is medial, so that there results a major (irrational)
composed of three lines.
" A n d , in an analogous manner, we obtain the straight line which is the
' s i d e ' of a rational plus a medial area, composed of three straight lines, and,
likewise, that which is the ' side' of (the sum of) two medials."
T h e generalisation of the medial is apparently after the following manner.
Let x, y be two straight lines rational and commensurable in square only and
suppose that m means are interposed, so that
x : x — Xi : x — x : x — ... — x ~, : x
l

We easily derive herefrom

3

3

s

m

m

—x

m

:y.

