BOOK XIII.
HISTORICAL NOTE.

I Wave already given, in the note to iv. io, the evidence upon which the
construction of the five regular solids is attributed to the Pythagoreans. Some
of them, the cube, the tetrahedron (which is nothing but a pyramid), and the
octahedron (which is only a double pyramid with a square base), cannot but
have been known to the Egyptians. And it appears that dodecahedra have
been found, of bronze or other material, which may belong to periods earlier
than Pythagoras' time by some centuries (for references see Cantor's Geschichte
der Mathematik l„ pp. 175—6).
It is true that the author of the scholium No. 1 to Eucl. xm. says that the
Book is about "the five so-called Platonic figures, which however do not
belong to Plato, three of the aforesaid five figures being due to the Pythagoreans,
namely the cube, the pyramid and the dodecahedron, while the octahedron
and the icosahedron are due to Theaetetus." This statement (taken probably
from Geminus) may perhaps rest on the fact that Theaetetus was the first to
write at any length about the two last-mentioned solids. We are told indeed
by Suidas (s. v. ©carnfro?) that Theaetetus "firstwrote on the ' five solids' as
they are called." This no doubt means that Theaetetus was the first to write
a complete and systematic treatise on all the regular solids; it .does not
exclude the possibility that Hippasus or others had already written on the
dodecahedron. The fact that Theaetetus wrote upon the regular solids agrees
very well with the evidence which we possess of his contributions to the
theory of irrationals, the connexion between which and the investigation of
the regular solids is seen in Euclid's Book xm.
Theaetetus flourished about 380 B.C., and his work on the regular solids
was soon followed by another, that of Aristaeus, an elder contemporary of
Euclid, who also wrote an important book on Solid Loci, i.e. on conies treated
as loci. This Aristaeus (known as "the elder") wrote in the period about
320 B.C. We hear of his Comparison of the five regular solids from Hypsicles
(2nd cent B.C.), the writer of the short book commonly included in the editions
of the Elements as Book xiv. Hypsicles gives in this Book some six proposi­
tions supplementing Eucl. X I I I . ; and he introduces the second of the
propositions (Heiberg's Euclid, Vol. v. p. 6) as follows:
" The same circle circumscribes both the pentagon of the dodecahedron a
triangle of the icosahedron when both are inscribed in the same sphere. Th
proved by Aristaeus in the book entitled Comparison of thefivefigures."

