therefore, alternately, as the area S is to the circle EFGH, so
is the circle ABCD to the area T.
[v. 16]
But the area 6" is greater than the circle EFGH;
therefore the circle ABCD is also greater than the area T.
Hence, as the area S is to the circle ABCD, so is the
circle EFGH to some area less than the circle ABCD.
Q. E. D.


Though this theorem is said to have been proved by Hippocrates, we may
with tolerable certainty attribute the proof of it given by Euclid to Eudoxus,
to whom xn. 7 Tor. and XII. 10 (which Euclid proves in exactly the same
manner) are specifically attributed by Archimedes. A s regards the lemma
used herein (Eucl. x. 1 ) and the somewhat different lemma by means of which
Archimedes says that the theorems of XU. 2, xn. 7 Por. and xn. 18 were
proved, see my note on x. 1 above.
T h e first essential in this proposition is to prove that we can exhaust a
circle, in the sense of x. 1, by successively inscribing in it regular polygons,
each of which has twice as many sides as the preceding one. We take first
an inscribed square, then bisect the arcs subtended by the sides and so form
an equilateral polygon of eight sides, then do the same with the latter, forming
a polygon of 16 sides, and so on. A n d we have to prove that what is left
over when any one of these polygons is taken away from the circle is more
than half exhausted when the next polygon is made and subtracted from the
circle.
Euclid proves that the inscribed square is greater than half the circle and
that the regular octagon when subtracted takes away more than half of what
was left by the square. H e then infers that the same
thing will happen whenever the number of sides is
O
C
E
doubled.
This can be seen generally by taking any arc of a
circle cut off by a chord AB.
Bisect the arc in C.
Draw a tangent to the circle at C, and let AD, BE
be drawn perpendicular to the tangent. Join A C, C B .
T h e n DE is parallel to AB, since
LECB
= L CAB, in alternate segment, [in. 32]
= L CBA.
[111. 29, 1. 5]
T h u s ABED

is

a O ;

and it is greater than the segment A C B .
Therefore its half, the A A C B , is greater than half the segment.
Thus, by x. i, Euclid's construction of successive regular polygons in
a circle, if continued far enough, will at length leave segments which are
together less than any given area.
Now let X, X' be the areas of the circles, d, d' their diameters, respectively.
Then, if
X : X' =1= d* : d",
d : d' = X : S, •
where S is some area either greater or less than A ' .
2

1

I. Suppose 5 < X'.
Continue the construction of polygons in X' until we arrive at one which


