
and on the triangles def, ghi,... as bases draw interior prisms having for edges
the parts ad, dg, ... of av.
All the partial prisms will then have the same height z.
Now the sum of the exterior prisms of the pyramid VABC is greater than
that pyramid;
and the sum of the interior prisms in the pyramid vabc is less than that
pyramid.
Consequently the difference between the sum of the first set of prisms and
the sum of the second set of prisms is greater than the difference between the
two pyramids.
Again, if we start from the bases ABC, abc, the second exterior prism
DEFG is equivalent to the first interior prism defa, since their bases are
equivalent and they have the same height z.
[ x i . 28 and note; x i . 32]
Similarly the third exterior prism is equivalent to the second interior
prism, and so on, until we arrive at the last of each.
Therefore the prism ABCD, the first exterior prism, is the difference
between the sums of the exterior and interior prisms respectively.
Therefore the difference between the cwo pyramids is less than the prism
ABCD, which should therefore be greater than the prism with base ABC
and height AX.
But the prism ABCD is, by hypothesis, less than the latter prism :
which is impossible.
Consequently the pyramid VABC cannot be greater than the pyramid
vabc.
Similarly it may be proved that vabc cannot be greater than VABC.
Therefore the pyramids are equivalent.
Legendre next establishes a proposition corresponding to Eucl. x n . 7, viz.
4. Any triangular pyramid is one third of the triangular prism on the same
base and of the same height,
and from this he deduces that
C O R . The volume of a triangular pyramid is equal to a third of the product
of its base by its height.
H e has previously proved that the volume of a triangular prism is equal to
the product of its base and height, since (1) the prism is half of a parallele­
piped of the same height and with a parallelogram for base which is double of
the base of the prism, and (2) this parallelepiped can be transformed into an
equivalent rectangular parallelepiped with the same height and an equivalent
base.
T h e theorem (4) is then extended to any pyramid in the proposition
5. Any pyramid has for its measure the third part of the product of its base
and its height, from which follow
C O R . I. Any pyramid is the third part of the prism on the same base and
of the same height.
C O R . I I . Two pyramids of the same height are to one another as their
bases, and hvo pyramids on the same base are to one another as their heights.
The first part of the second corollary corresponds to the present
proposition as extended by the next, x n . 6,


