Therefore the solid BGML has to the solid EHQP the
ratio triplicate of that which the corresponding side BC has to
the corresponding side EF.
But, as the solid BGML is to the solid EHQP, so is the
pyramid ABCG to the pyramid DEFH,
inasmuch as the pyramid is a sixth part of the solid, because
the prism which is half of the parallelepipedal solid [xi. 28] is
also triple of the pyramid.
[xn. 7]
Therefore the pyramid ABCG also has to the pyramid
DEFH the ratio triplicate of that which BC has to EF.
Q. E. D.


PORISM.
From this it is manifest that similar pyramids
which have polygonal bases are also to one another in the
triplicate ratio of their corresponding sides.
For, if they are divided into the pyramids contained in
them which have triangular bases, by virtue of the fact that
the similar polygons forming their bases are also divided into
similar triangles equal in multitude and corresponding to the
wholes [vi. 20],
then, as the one pyramid which has a triangular base in the
one complete pyramid is to the one pyramid which has a
triangular base in the other complete pyramid, so also will all
the pyramids which have triangular bases contained in the
one pyramid be to all the pyramids which have triangular
bases contained in the other pyramid [v. 12], that is, the
pyramid itself which has a polygonal base to the pyramid
which has a polygonal base.
But the pyramid which has a triangular base is to the
pyramid which has a triangular base in the triplicate ratio of
the corresponding sides;
therefore also the pyramid which has a polygonal base has to
the pyramid which has a similar base the ratio triplicate of
that which the side has to the side.
It is at once proved that, the pyramids being similar, the parallelepipeds
constructed as shown in the figure are also similar.
Consequently, as these latter are in the triplicate ratio of their corre­
sponding sides [xi. 33], so are the pyramids which are their sixth parts
respectively (being one third of the respective prisms on the same bases, i.e.
of the halves of the respective parallelepipeds, XI. 28).
A s the Porism is not used where Euclid might have been expected to use
it (see note on XII. 12, p. 416), there is some reason to doubt its genuineness.
P only has it in the margin, though in the first hand.


