BOOK XII

fxii. io

therefore the remainder, the pyramid of which the polygon
AEBFCGDH
is the base and the vertex the same with that
of the cone, is greater than a third part of the cylinder.
But the pyramid of which the polygon AEBFCGDH
is
the base and the vertex the same with that of the cone is a
third part of the prism of which the polygon
AEBFCGDH
is the base and the height is the same with that of the
cylinder;
therefore the prism of which the polygon AEBFCGDH
is
the base and the height is the same with that of the cylinder
is greater than the cylinder of which the circle ABCD is the
base.
But it is also less, for it is enclosed by i t :
which is impossible.
Therefore the cylinder is not less than triple of the cone.
But it was proved that neither is it greater than triple;
therefore the cylinder is triple of the cone;
hence the cone is a third part of the cylinder.
Therefore etc.
Q. E. D.


We observe the use in this proposition of the term "parallelepipedal
prism," which recalls Heron's " parallelogrammic " or " parallel-sided prism."
The course of the proof is exactly the same as in x u . 2, except that an
arithmetical fraction takes the place of a ratio which, being incommensurable,
could only be expressed as a ratio. Consequently we do not need proportions
in this proposition, as we did in XII. 2, and shall again in XII, 11, etc.
Euclid exhausts the cylinder and cone respectively by setting up prisms
and pyramids of the same height on the successive regular polygons inscribed
in the circle which is the common base, viz. the square, the regular polygon
of 8 sides, that of 16 sides, etc.
If AB be the side of one polygon, we obtain two sides of the next by
bisecting the arc ACB and joining AC, CB. Draw the
tangent DE at C and complete the parallelogram
ABED.
Now suppose a prism erected on the polygon of
which AB is a side, and of the same height as that of
the cylinder.
To obtain the prism of the same height on the next
polygon we add all the triangular prisms of the same
height on the bases A CB and the rest.
Now the prism on ACB is half the prism of the
same height on the CD ABED as base.
[cf. xi. 28]


