And the prism on O ABED includes, and is greater than, the portion of
the cylinder standing on the segment A CB of the circle.
The same thing is true in regard to the other sides of the polygon of
which AB is one side.
Thus the process begins with a prism on the square inscribed in the circle,
which is more than half the cylinder, the next prism (with eight lateral faces)
takes away more than half the remainder, and so on ;
hence [x. 1], if we proceed far enough, we shall ultimately arrive at a prism
leaving over portions of the cylinder together less than any assigned volume.
The construction of pyramids on the successive polygons exhausts the cone
in exactly the same way.
Now, if the cone is not equal to one-third of the cylinder, it must be either
greater or less.
I. Suppose, if possible, that, V, O being their volumes respectively,
0>zV.
Construct successive inscribed polygons in the bases and prisms on them
until we arrive at a prism P leaving over portions of the cylinder together less
than (O- 3 V), i.e. such that
But P is triple of the pyramid on the same base and of the same height;
and this pyramid is included by, and is therefore less than, V;
therefore
P < 3 V.
But, by construction,
P> 3 V:
which is impossible.
Therefore
<9 > 3 V.
II. Suppose, if possible, that O < 3 V.
Therefore
V> ^O.
Construct successive pyramids in the cone in the manner described until
we arrive at a pyramid n leaving over portions of the cone together less than
(V-iO), i.e. such that
V>li>\0.
Now n is one-third of the prism oh the same base and of the same height;
and this prism is included by, and is therefore less than, the cylinder;
therefore
n < \0.
But, by construction,
II > \0:
which is impossible.
Therefore O is neither greater nor less than 3 V, so that
0 = $V.
It will be observed that here, as in xn. 2, Euclid always exhausts the solid
by (as it were) building up to it from inside. Hence the solid to be exhausted
must, with him, be supposed greater than the solid to which it is to be proved
equal; and this is the reason why, in the second part, the initial supposition
is turned round.
In this case too Euclid might have approximated to the cone and cylinder
by circumscribing successive pyramids and prisms in the way shown, after
Archimedes, in the note on Xi!. 2.

