Again, since from the similar A s BKL, FMN, and the similar A s BKT,
FMP respectively,
LB : BK= NF: FM,
BK: BT= MF: FP,
ex aequali,
LB:BT= NF: FP.
Similarly
LT: TB = NP: PF.
Inverting the latter ratio and compounding it with the preceding one, we
have, ex aequali,
LB : LT= NF: NP.
Thus in A s LTB, NPF the sides are proportional in pairs;
therefore
(4)
A s LTB, NPF'are similar.
Thus the partial pyramids L-BKT, N-FMP are similar.
In exactly the same way it is proved that all the other partial pyramids are
similar.
Now
(pyramid L-BKT) i (pyramid N-FMP) = ratio triplicate of {BK: FM).
The other partial pyramids are to one another in the same triplicate ratio.
The sum of the antecedents is therefore to the sum of the consequents in
the same triplicate ratio,
i.e.
(pyramid L-ATBU...) : (pyramid N-F.PFQ...)
- ratio triplicate of ratio (BK: FM)
= ratio triplicate of ratio (BD : FH).
[The fact that Euclid makes this transition from the partial pyramids to
the whole pyramids in the body of this proposition seems to me to suggest
grave doubts as to the genuineness of the Porism to xn. 8, which contains a
similar but rather more general extension from the case of triangular pyramids
to pyramids with polygonal bases. Were that Porism genuine, Euclid would
have been more likely to refer to it than to repeat here the same arguments
which it contains.]
Now we are in a position to apply the method of exhaustion.
If X, X' be the volumes of the cones, d, d' the diameters of their bases, and if
(ratio triplicate of d : d')=¥X: X',
then must
(ratio triplicate of d: d') = X: 0,
where 0 is either less or greater than X'.
I. Suppose that 0 is less than X'.
Construct in the way described a pyramid (II') in X' leaving over portions
of X' together less than (X' - 0), so that X' > IT > 0,
and construct in X a pyramid ( n ) , with the same vertex as X has, on a
polygon inscribed in its base similar to the base of n'.
Then, by what has just been proved,
1 1 : 1 1 ' = (ratio triplicate of d: d')
= X: O, by hypothesis,
and, alternately,
II: X = IT : 0.
But X includes, and is therefore greater than, II;
therefore
O > n'.
But, by construction,
O < IT :
which is impossible. .
Therefore
O cannot be less than X'.

