Therefore the cylinder AO is equal to the cylinder EP.
b- 9]
And the same is true for the cones also.
Q. E. D.


I. If the heights of the two cylinders are equal, and their volumes are
equal, the bases are equal, since the latter are proportional to the volumes.
[xu. 11]
If the heights are not equal, cut off from the higher cylinder a cylinder of
the same height as the lower.
Then, if LK, QNbe the equal heights,
we have, by xn. u ,
(base ABCD): (base EFGH) = (cylinder AO): (cylinder ES)
= (cylinder EP): (cylinder ES),
by hypothesis,
= MN:QN
[xu-13]
= MN: KL.
II. In the converse part of the proposition, Euclid omits the case where
the cylinders have equal heights. In this case of course the reciprocal ratios
are both ratios of equality; the bases are therefore equal, and consequently the
cylinders.
If the heights are not equal, we have, with the same construction as before,
(base ABCD): (base EFGH) = MN: KL.
But[xn. 1 1 ]
(base ABCD): (base EFGH) = (cylinder AO): (cylinder ES),
and
MN: KL^MN: QN
= (cylinder EP): (cylinder ES).
[xn. 13]
Therefore
(cylinder AO): (cylinder ES) = (cylinder EP): (cylinder ES),
and consequently
(cylinder AO) = (cylinder EP).
Similarly for the cones, which are equal to one-third of the cylinders
respectively.
Legendre deduces these propositions about cones and cylinders from two
others which he establishes by a method similar
to that adopted by him for the theorem of xn. 2
(see note on that proposition).
The first (for the cylinder) is as follows.
The volume of a cylinder is equal to the
product of its base by its height.
Suppose CA to be the radius of the base of
the given cylinder, h its height.
For brevity let us denote by (surf. CA) the
area of the circle of which CA is the radius.
If (surf. CA) x h is not the measure of the
given cylinder, it will be the measure of a
cylinder greater or less than it.
I. First let it be the measure of a less
cylinder, that, for example, of which the circle with radius CD is the base, and
h is the height


