Circumscribe about the circle with radius CD a regular polygon GHI...
such that its sides do not anywhere meet the circle with radius CA. [See note
on xii. 2, p. 393 above, for Legendre's lemma relating to this construction.]
Imagine a prism erected on the polygon as base and with height h.
Then
(volume of prism) = (polygon GHI...) x h.
[Legendre has previously proved this proposition, first for a parallelepiped
(by transforming it into a rectangular one), then for a triangular prism (half of
a parallelepiped of the same height), and lastly for a prism with a polygonal
base.]
But
(polygon GHI,..) < (surf. CA).
Therefore
(volume of prism) < (surf. CA) x h
< (cylinder on circle of rad. CD),
by hypothesis.
But the prism is greater than the latter cylinder, since it includes it:
which is impossible.

II. In order not to multiply figures let us, in this second case, suppose
that CD is the radius of the base of the given cylinder, and that (surf. CD) x h
is the measure of a cylinder greater than it, e.g. a cylinder on the circle with
radius CA as base and of height h.
Then, with the same construction,
(volume of prism) = (polygon GHI...) x h.
And
(polygon GHI...)> (surf. CD).
Therefore
(volume of prism) > (surf. CD) x h
> (cylinder on surf. CA), by hypothesis.
But the volume of the prism is also less than that cylinder, being included
by it:
which is impossible.
Therefore
(volume of cylinder) = (its base) x (its height).
It follows as a corollary that
Cylinders of the same height are to one another as their bases [xn. 13], and
cylinders on the same base are to one another as their heights [xn. 14].
Also
Similar cylinders are as the cubes of their heights, or as the cubes of the
diameters of their bases [Eucl. xn. 12].
For the bases are as the squares on their diameters; and, since the
cylinders are similar, the diameters of the bases are as their heights.
Therefore the bases are as the squares on the heights, and the bases
multiplied by the heights, or the cylinders themselves, are as the cubes of the
heights.
I need not reproduce Legendre's proofs of the corresponding propositions
for the cone.
PROPOSITION 

1 6 .

Given two circles about the same centre, to inscribe in the
greater circle an equilateral polygon with an even number of
sides which does not touch the lesser circle.


