PROPOSITIONS

i. 2

377

T h e fact asserted in the enunciation of this proposition has already been
used in the proof of I. 47 ; but there was no occasion in that proof to observe
that the two rectangles BL, CL making up the square on BC are the
rectangles contained by BC and the two parts, respectively, into which it is
divided by the perpendicular from A on BC.
It is this fact which it is
necessary to state in this proposition, in accordance with the plan of Book 11.
T h e second and third propositions are of course particular cases of the
first They were no doubt separately enunciated by Euclid in order that they
might be immediately available for use hereafter, instead of having to be
deduced for the particular occasion from 11. 1. For, if they had not been thus
separately stated, it would scarcely have been practicable to quote them later
without explaining at the same time that they are included in 11. 1 as particular
cases. And, though the propositions are not used by Euclid in the later
propositions of Book 11., they are used afterwards in x m . 10 and i x . 15
respectively; and they are of extreme importance for geometry generally,
being constantly used by Pappus, for example, who frequently quotes the
third proposition by the Book and number.
Attention has been called to the fact that n. 1 is never used by E u c l i d ;
and this may seem no less remarkable than the fact that 11. 2, 3 are not again
used in Book 11. But it is important, I think, to observe that the proofs o f
all the first ten propositions of Book n. are practically independent of each
other, though the results are really so interwoven that they can often be
deduced from each other in a variety of ways. What then was Euclid's
intention, first in inserting some propositions not immediately required, and
secondly in making the proofs of the first ten practically independent of
each other? Surely the object was to show the power of the method of
geometrical algebra as much as to arrive at results. From the point of view
of illustrating the method, there can be no doubt that Euclid's procedure is
far more instructive than the semi-algebraical substitutes which seem to find
a good deal of favour; practically it means that, instead of relying on our
memory of a few standard formulae, we can use the machinery given us by
Euclid's method to prove immediately ab initio any of the propositions taken
at random.
Let us contrast with Euclid's plan the semi-algebraical alternative. O n e
editor, for example, thinks that, as 11. 1 is not used by Euclid afterwards, it
seems more logical to deduce from it those of the subsequent propositions
which can be readily so deduced. Putting this idea into practice, he proves
11. 2 and 3 by quoting 11. 1, then proves 11. 4 by means of 11. 1 and 3,11. 5 and
6 by means of 11. 1, 3 and 4, and so on. T h e result is ultimately to deduce
the whole of the first ten propositions from 11. 1, which Euclid does not use at
a l l ; and this is to give an importance to 11. 1 which is altogether dispro­
portionate and, by starting with such a narrow foundation, to make the whole
structure of Book 11. top-heavy.
Editors have of course been much influenced by a desire to make the
proofs of the propositions of Book 11. easier, as they think, for schoolboys.
But, even from this point of view, is it an improvement to deduce n. 2 and 3
from 11. 1 as corollaries ? I doubt it. For, in the first place, Euclid's figures
visualise the results and so make it easier to grasp their m e a n i n g ; the truth
of the propositions is made clear even to the eye. Then, in the matter of
brevity, to which such an exaggerated importance is attached, Euclid's proof
positively has the advantage. Counting a capital letter or a collocation of such
as one word, I find, e.g., that Mr H. M . Taylor's proof of 11. 2 contains

