PROPOSITION 4
T h e editions of the Greek text which preceded that of E . F. August
(Berlin, 1826—9) give a second proof of this proposition introduced by the
usual word dAAo>s or "otherwise thus." Heiberg follows August in omitting
this proof, which is attributed to Theon, and which is indeed not worth
reproducing, since it only differs from the genuine proof in that portion of it
which proves that CGKB is a square. T h e proof that CGKB is equilateral
is rather longer than Euclid's, and the only interesting point to notice is that,
whereas Euclid still, as in 1. 46, seems to regard it as necessary to prove that
all the angles of CGKB are right angles before he concludes that it is rightangled, Theon says simply " A n d it also has the angle CBK right; therefore
CK is a square." T h e shorter form indicates a legitimate abbreviation of the
genuine proof; because there can be no need to repeat exactly that part of the
proof of 1. 46 which shows that all the angles of the figure there constructed
are right when one is.
There is also in the Greek text a Porism which is undoubtedly interpolated:
" F r o m this it is manifest that in square areas the parallelograms about the
diameter are squares." Heiberg doubted its genuineness when preparing his
edition, and conjectured that it too may have been added by T h e o n ; but the
matter is placed beyond doubt by a papyrus-fragment referred to already (see
Heiberg, Paralipomena zu Euklid, in Hermes X X X V I I I . , 1903, p. 48) in which
the Porism was evidently wanting. It is the only Porism in Book 11., but
does not correspond to Proclus' remark (p. 304, 2) that " the Porism found in
the second book belongs to a problem." Heiberg regards these words as
referring to the Porism to iv. 15, the correct reading having probably been not
&€VT(pu> but

6", i.e.

Ttrapru,.

T h e semi-algebraical proof of this proposition is very easy, and is of course
old enough, being found in Clavius and in most later editions. I t proceeds
thus.
By 11. 2, the square on AB is equal to the sum of the rectangles AB, AC
and AB, CB.
But, by 11. 3, the rectangle AB, AC is equal to the sum of the square on
AC and the rectangle AC, CB ;
while, by 11. 3, the rectangle AB, CB is equal to the sum of the square on
BC and the rectangle AC, CB.
Therefore the square on AB is equal to the sum of the squares on
AC, CB and twice the rectangle AC, CB.
T h e figure of the proposition also helps to visualise, in the orthodox
manner, the proof of the theorem deduced above from 11. 1—3, viz. that the
difference of the squares on two given straight lines is equal to the rectangle
contained by the sum and the difference of the lines.
For, if the lines be AB, BC respectively, the shorter of the lines being
measured along BA, the figure shows that
the square AE is equal to the sum of the square CK and the rectangles
AF, EK;
that is, the square on AB is equal to the sum of the square on BC and
the rectangles AB, AC and AC, BC.
But the rectangles AB, AC and BC, AC axe, by 11. 1, together equal to
the rectangle contained by AC and the sum of AB, BC,
i.e to the rectangle contained by the sum and difference of AB, BC.
Whence the result follows as before.

