and the discoveries of the Muse of the Pythagoreans, the application of
areas, their exceeding and their falling-short" We can therefore hardly
avoid crediting the Pythagoreans with the geometrical solution, based upon
11. s, 6, of the problems corresponding to the quadratic equations which
are directly obtainable from them. It is certain that the Pythagoreans solved
the problem in 11. 1 1 , which corresponds to the quadratic equation
a (a — x) = x*,
and Simson has suggested the following easy solution of the equation now in
question,
ax — x = b ,
on exactly similar lines.
Draw CO perpendicular to AB and equal to b; produce OC to N so
that C / V = CB (or \a); and with O as centre
and radius ON describe a circle cutting CB
B
in D.
c
T h e n DB (or x) is found, and therefore
the required rectangle AH.
For the rectangle AD, DB together with
H
the square on CD is equal to the square on
0
CB,
[11. 5]
i.e. to the square on OD,
i.e. to the squares on OC, CD;
[1. 47]
whence the rectangle AD, DB is equal to the square on OC,
or
ax - x* — b*.
i

t

//

It is of course a necessary condition of the possibility of a real solution
that P must not be greater that (£«)". T h i s condition itself can easily be
obtained from Euclid's proposition; for, since the sum of the rectangle AD,
DB and the square on CD is equal to the square on CB, which is constant,
it follows that, as CD diminishes, i.e. as D moves nearer to C, the rectangle
AD, DB increases and, when D actually coincides with C, so that CD
vanishes, the rectangle AD, DB becomes the rectangle AC, CB, i.e. the
square on CB, and is a maximum. It will be seen also that the geometrical
solution of the quadratic equation derived from Euclid does not differ from
our practice of solving a quadratic by completing the square on the side
containing the terms in x* and x.
But, while in this case there are two geometrically real solutions (because
the circle described with ON as radius will not only cut CB in D but will
also cut AC in another point E), Euclid's figure corresponds to one only of
the two solutions. Not that there is any doubt that Euclid was aware that the
method of solving the quadratic gives two solutions; he could not fail to see
that x = BE satisfies the equation as well as x = BD.
If however he had
actually given us the solution of the equation, he would probably have
omitted to specify the solution x = BE because the rectangle found by means
of it, which would be a rectangle on the base AE (equal to BD) and with
altitude EB (equal to AD), is really an equal rectangle to that corresponding
to the other solution x = BD; there is therefore no real object in distinguishing
two solutions. T h i s is easily understood when we regard the equation as a
statement of the problem of finding two magnitudes when their sum (a) and
product (b ) are given, i.e. as equivalent to the simultaneous equations
2

x +y = a,

