system of forming side- and diagonal-numbers and definitely attribute it, as
well as the distinction between the " rational" and " irrational diameter," to
the Pythagoreans. Proclus further says (p. 2 7 , 1 6 — 2 2 ) that the property of the
side- and diagonal-numbers " is proved graphically (ypapiuKuis) in the second
book o f the Elements by 'him' (AIR' CWVOU). For, if a straight line be bisected
and a straight line be added to it, the square on the whole line including the
added straight line and the square on the latter alone are double of the square on
the half of the original straight line and of the square on the straight line made
up of the half and of the added straight line." A n d this is simply Eucl. 11. 10.
Proclus then goes on to show specifically how this proposition was used to
prove that, with the notation above used, the diameter corresponding to the
side a + d is 2a + d. L e t AB be a side and BC equal to it, while CD is the
diameter corresponding to AB, i.e. a straight line such that the square on it is
double of the square on AB. (I use the figure supplied by Hultsch on p. 397
of Kroll's VoL 11.)

Then, by the theorem of Eucl. n . i o , the squares on AD, DC axe double
of the squares on AB, BD.
But the square on DC (i.e. BE) is double of the square on AB; therefore,
by subtraction, the square on AD is double of the square on BD.
A n d the square o n DE, the diagonal corresponding to the side BD, is
double the square o f BD.
Therefore the square on DE is equal to the square on AD, so that DE is
equal to AD.
T h a t is, while the side BD is, with our notation, a + d, the corresponding
diagonal, being equal to AD, is 2a + d.
In the above reference by Proclus to n. 10 ar kctYov " b y him" must
apparently mean vr EvkaciSov, " by Euclid," although Euclid's name has not
been mentioned in the chapter; the phrase would be equivalent to saying
" i n the second Book of the famous Elements." But, when Proclus says "this
is proved in the second Book of the Elements," he does not imply that it had
not been proved before; on the contrary, it is clear that the theorem had
been proved by the Pythagoreans, and we have therefore here a confirmation
of the inference from the part played by the gnomon and by 1. 47 in Book II.
that the whole of the substance of that Book was Pythagorean. For further
detailed explanation of the passages of Proclus reference should be made to
Hultsch's note in Kroll's V o l . II. pp. 393—400, and to the separate article,
also by Hultsch, in the Bibliotheca Mathematica i „ 1900, pp. 8—12.
P . Bergh has an ingenious suggestion (see Zeitschrift fur Math. u. Physik

