P R O P O S I T I O N 10

II. IOj

401

x x x i . Hist.-litt. A b t . p . 135, and Cantor, Geschichte der Mathematik, i „ p. 437)
as to the way in which the formation of the successive
side- and diagonal-numbers may have been discovered,
namely by observation from a very simple geometrical
figure. Let ABC be an isosceles triangle, right-angled at
A, with sides a . a , . , , «"„_, respectively. I f now the
two sides AB, AC about the right angle be lengthened
by adding <4_! to each, and the extremities D, E be
joined, it is easily seen by means of the figure (in which
BF, CG are perpendicular to DE) that the new diagonal
d is equal to 2«„_ + d _ while the equal sides a „ are, by construction, equal
to «»_, + 4,-!.
n

%

u

1

n

u

Important deductions from I I . 9, 10.
I. Pappus (VII. pp. 856—8) uses n . 9, 10 for proving tne well-known
theorem that
The sum of the squares on two sides of a triangle is equal to twice the square
on half the base together with twice the square on the straight line joining the
middle point of the base to the opposite vertex.
Let ABC be the given triangle and D the middle point of the base BC.
Join AD, and draw AE perpendicular to BC (produced if necessary).

C

E

Now, by 11. 9, 10,
the squares on BE, EC are equal to twice the squares on BD, DE.
A d d to each twice the square on AE.
Then, remembering that
the squares on BE, EA are equal to the square on BA,
the squares on AE, EC are equal to the square on A C,
and the squares on AE, ED are equal to the square on AD,
we find that
the squares on BA, AC are equal to twice the squares on AD, BD.
T h e proposition is generally proved by means of n. 12, 1 3 , but not, I
think, so conveniently as by the method of Pappus.
I I . T h e inference was early made by Gregory of S t Vincent ( 1 5 8 4 - 1 6 6 7 )
and Viviani (1622-1703) that In any parallelogram the squares on the diagonals
are together equal to the squares on the sides, or to twice the squares on adjacent
sides.
III. It appears that Leonhard Euler (1707-83) was the first to discover
the corresponding theorem with reference to any quadrilateral, namely that
In any quadrilateral the sum of the squares on the sides is equal to the sum of the
squares on the diagonals andfour times the square on the line joining the middle

