II.

T2]

P R O P O S I T I O N 12

Describe squares on BC, CA, AB, as BCED, CAGE,
ABKH.
Draw AL, BM, CN, perpendicular to BC, CA, AB (produced if neces­
sary), and produce them to meet the further
sides of the squares on them in P, Q, R re­
spectively.
Join AD, CK.
Then, as in I. 47, the triangles KBC, ABD
are equal in all respects ;
therefore their doubles, the parallelograms in
the same parallels respectively, are e q u a l ;
that is, the rectangle BP is equal to the
rectangle BR.
Similarly the rectangle CP is equal to the
rectangle CQ.
Also, if BG, CH be joined, we see that
the triangles BAG, HAC are equal in
all respects;
therefore their doubles, the rectangles A Q, AR, are equal.
Now the square on BC is equal to the sum of the rectangles BP, CP,
i.e. to the sum of the rectangles BR, CQ,
i.e. to the sum of the squares BH, CG and
the rectangles AR, AQ.
But the rectangles AR, AQ are equal, and they are respectively the
rectangle contained by BA, ANaxiA the rectangle contained by CA, AM.
Therefore the square on BC is equal to the squares on BA, AC together
with twice the rectangle BA, ANor CA, AM.
Incidentally this proof shows that the rectangle BA, AN is equal tq the
rectangle CA, AM: a result which will be seen later on to be a particular
case of the theorem in i n . 35.
Heron (in an-Nairizi, ed. Curtze, p. 109) gives a " c o n v e r s e " of n . i a
related to it as 1. 48 is related to 1. 47.
In any triangle, if the square on one of the sides is greater than the squares
on the other two sides, the angle contained by the latter is obtuse.
Let ABC be a triangle such that the square on BC is greater than the
squares on BA, AC.
Draw AD at right angles to A C and
of length equal to AB.
Join DC.
Then, since DA C is a right angle,
the square on DC is equal to the squares
on DA, AC,
[1. 4 7 ]
i.e. to the squares on BA, A C.
But the square on BC is greater than
the squares on BA, AC; therefore the square on BC is greater than the
square on DC.
Therefore BC is greater than DC.
Thus, in the triangles BAC, DAC, *
the two sides BA, AC are equal to the two sides DA, A C respectively,
but the base BC is greater than the base DC.

