is curious that it speaks of the square on the side subtending the acute angle;
and again the setting-out begins " let ABC be an acute-angled triangle hairing
the angle at B acute" though the last words have no point if all the angles of
the triangle are necessarily acute.
It was however very early noticed, not only by Isaacus Monachus,
Campanus, Peletarius, Clavius, Commandinus and the rest, but by the Greek
scholiast (Heiberg, V o l . v. p. 253), that the relation between the sides of a
triangle established by this theorem is true of the side opposite to, and the
sides about, an acute angle respectively in any sort of triangle whether acuteangled, right-angled or obtuse-angled. T h e scholiast tries to explain away the
word " acute-angled" in the enunciation: " Since in the definitions he calls
acute-angled the triangle which has three acute angles, you must know that he
does not mean that here, but calls all triangles acute-angled because all have
an acute angle, one at least, if not all. T h e enunciation therefore i s : ' I n any
triangle the square on the side subtending the acute angle is less than the
squares on the sides containing the acute angle by twice the rectangle, e t c . ' "
We may judge too by Heron's enunciation of his " c o n v e r s e " of the
proposition that he would have left the word "acute-angled" out of the
enunciation. H i s converse is : In any triangle in which the square on one of
the sides is less than the squares on the other two sides, the angle contained by the
latter sides is acute.
If the triangle that we take is a right-angled triangle, and the perpendicular
is drawn, not from the right angle, but from the acute angle
not referred to in the enunciation, the proposition reduces
to 1. 47, and this case need not detain us.
T h e other cases can be proved, like 11. 1 2 , after the
manner of 1. 47.
Let us take first the case where all the angles of the
triangle are acute.
H

TBQ>

J
D

L

P

E

A s before, if we draw ALP, BMQ, CNR perpendicular to BC, CA, AB
and meeting the further sides of the squares on BC, CA, AB in P, Q, R, and
if we join KC, AD, we have
the triangles KBC, ABD equal in all respects,
and consequently the rectangles BP, BR equal to one another.
Similarly the rectangles CP, CQ are equal to one another.

