Next, by joining BG, CH, we prove in like manner that the rectangles AR,
AQ are equal.
Now the square on BC is equal to the sum of the rectangles BP,

CP,

i.e. to the sum of the rectangles BR, CQ,
i.e. to the sum of the squares BH, CG diminished by the rectangles
AR, AQ.
But the rectangles AR, AQ are equal, and they are respectively the
rectangles contained by BA, AN and by CA, AM.
Therefore the square on BC is less than the squares on BA, AC by
twice the rectangle BA, AN or CA, AM.
Next suppose that we have to prove the theorem in the case where the
triangle has an obtuse angle at A.
T a k e B as the acute angle under considera­
tion, so that A C is the side opposite to it.
N o w the square on CA is equal to the
difference of the rectangles CQ, AQ,
i.e. to the difference between CP and
AQ,
i.e. to the difference between the square
BE and the sum of the rectangles
BP,
AQ,
i.e. to the difference between the square
BE and the sum of the rectangles
BP, AR,
i.e. to the difference between the sum of
the squares BE, BH and the sum
of the rectangles BP, BR
(since AR is the difference between BR and

BH).

B u t BP, BR are equal, and they are respectively the rectangles CB, BL
and AB, BN.
Therefore the square on CA is less than the squares on AB, BC by twice
the rectangle CB, BL or AB. BN.
Heron's proof of his converse proposition (an-Nairizi, ed. Curtze, p. n o ) ,
which is also given by the Greek scholiast above quoted,
is of course simple. For let ABC be a triangle in which
the square on A C is less than the squares on AB, BC.
Draw BD at right angles to BC and of length equal
to BA.
Join DC.
T h e n , since the angle CBD is right,
the square on DC is equal to the squares on DB, BC,
le. to the squares on AB, BC.
[1. 47]
But the square on AC is less than the squares on
AB, BC.
Therefore the square on AC is less than the square on DC.
Therefore AC is less, than DC.
H e n c e in the two triangles DBC, ABC the sides about the angles DBC,
ABC axe respectively equal, but the base DC is greater than the base AC.

