therefore the rectangle contained by BE,
EF
which
remains is equal to the square on EH.
30
But the rectangle BE, EF is BD, for EF is equal to ED;
therefore the parallelogram BD

is equal to the square on

HE.
A n d BD is equal to the rectilineal figure A .
Therefore the rectilineal figure A is also equal to the square
35 which can be described on EH.
Therefore a square, namely that which can be described
on EH, has been constructed equal to the given rectilineal
figure A .
Q. E. F.
7.
t h a t w h i c h w a s e n j o i n e d w i l l h a v e b e e n d o n e , literally " w o u l d have been
d o n e , " yeyovbs Sw drj to £iriTax0£v.
35> 36. w h i c h c a n b e d e s c r i b e d , expressed b y the future passive participle, ivaypaipi)aa[Uvtv, Ayaypa<prjtr6fi€vov.

Heiberg (Mathematisches zu Aristotelts, p . 20) quotes as bearing on this
proposition Aristotle's remark (De anima 11. 2, 413 a 1 9 : cf. Metaph. 996 b 21)
that " squaring " (riTpayavurfUK)
is better defined as the " finding of the mean
(proportional)" than as " the making of an equilateral rectangle equal to a
riven oblong," because the former definition states the cause, the latter the
inclusion only. This, Heiberg thinks, implies that in the text-books which were
in Aristotle's hands the problem of It. 14 was solved by means of proportions.
A s a matter of fact, the actual construction is the same in 11. 14 as in v i . 1 3 ;
and the change made by Euclid must have been confined to substituting in
the proof of the correctness of the construction an argument based on the
principles of Books 1. and I t instead of Book vi.
A s II. 12, 13 are supplementary to I. 47, so II. 14 completes the theory of
transformation of areas %o far as it can be carried without the use of proportions.
A s we have seen, the propositions 1. 42, 44, 45 enable us to construct a
parallelogram having a given side and angle, and equal to any given rectilineal
figure. The parallelogram can also be transformed into an equal triangle with
the same given side and angle by making the other side about the angle twice
the length. T h u s we can, as a particular case, construct a rectangle on a
given base (or a right-angled triangle with one of the sides about the right
angle of given length) equal to a given square. Further, 1. 47 enables us
to make a square equal to the sum of any number of squares or to the
difference between any two squares. T h e problem still remaining unsolved is
to transform any rectangle (as representing an area equal to that of any
rectilineal figure) into a square of equal area. T h e solution of this problem,
given in I t 14, is of course the equivalent of the extraction of the square root,
or of the solution of the pure quadratic equation
3

x = ab.
Simson pointed out that, in the construction given by Euclid in this case,
it was not necessary to put in the words " Let B E be greater," since the
construction is not affected by the question whether BE or ED is the greater.
This is true, but after all the words d o little harm, and perhaps Euclid may
have regarded it as conducive to clearness to have the points B, G, E, E in
the same relative positions as the corresponding points A, C, D, B in the
figure of 11. S which he quotes in the proof.

